1. VIABILITY
Establishing the viability of an analytical perspective on knowledge in the Norwegian
AEC industry and its desirability.
1.1 Context: the state of the AEC industry
1.1.1 Impact: the societal scale of the contemporary AEC industry
The scale of the contemporary architecture, engineering and construction (AEC)
industry is immense. In Norway, it is the second largest industry of the country. It
represents approximately 16% of the Norwegian BNP (Brekkhus, 2017) and employs
around 13% of the total workforce (Meld. St. 28 (2011–2012)). Its output – buildings
consuming about 40% of societal energy consumption (Drageland, 2015; Energifakta
Norge, 2019) – also represents 14% of Norway’s (Holter-Sørensen, 2017) climate
footprint in terms of CO2 emissions. Beyond these metrics, the industry concerns the
governance of many of our key societal resources such as land use, infrastructure,
housing and public space. Basically, the industry’s impact is felt in almost all areas of
society.
To truly comprehend the AEC industry’s full impact on society, however, we also
need to factor in the impact of its output – the built environment – on everyday life.
The built environment is the final value or good produced by the industry, which
means that the final output of the industry will always resist measurement.
Regardless of whether its actors are conscious of this fact or not, the AEC industry is
producing our shared Umwelt (Møystad, 2017), the context which we as living
organisms assume as conditional for any cognitive meaning, conscious or
unconscious (von Uexküll, 2010). The built environment conditions all our experience
and thinking. As such, it has a very direct (and indirect) significance for the daily life
of all members of society, at all ages, through all life phases and virtually at all times.
These remarkable scales and impacts make the industry perhaps the pre-eminent
productive process to study as a particularly relevant social-epistemological
phenomenon. Understanding knowledge in the building industry implies developing a
reflective understanding of the knowledge that produces the physical structure of a
society. Very few phenomena represent similar epistemological implications and
potential value, irrespective of how value is measured or quantified. The inherent
multiplicity of meanings, stakeholders and competencies involved in the industry,
however, makes a comprehensive inquiry into the nature and dynamics of the
industry as an epistemological phenomenon uniquely challenging.
1.1.2 Tendencies: change and complexity
1.1.2.1 Increasing complexity
Currently, the general development of the AEC industry appears to be heading
towards increasing degrees of complexity. This statement hardly needs proof, as it
seems to be a universally recognised trait of the industry. However, it has been
16
particularly emphasised and documented in project management literature (Koskela,
2000; Williams & Samset, 2010; Montequin et al., 2018; Cristóbal et al., 2018).
In the context of this dissertation, complexity should be understood in its broad
sense, as the interaction of a large set of components and facts which together
contribute to the industry’s form, content and output. By imagining the AEC industry
as a complex (dynamic) system (Bertelsen, 2003; Wood & Gidado, 2008; Wood et
al., 2014), I also suggest that its many heterogeneous elements determine and
shape each other, as well as the entirety of the system, through feedbackmechanisms, possibly in ways neither evident nor salient on the operational level of
the industry.
Furthermore, the development of the AEC industry correlates with the general
tendency of globalised society in that very few phenomena are reasonably described
in isolation. Most aspects of contemporary society come to relate to and depend on
each other (Johnson & Johnson, 2005). Constitutive aspects of building production,
such as transportation, production, labour mobility and finance, are global
phenomena. These, and many more, are just as dependent on circumstances in
other countries as they are locally, where the individual building projects happen.
1.1.2.2 Drivers of complexity
A comprehensive review of all the drivers of complexity quickly surpasses the
intended scope of this dissertation. As a general outline, however, I suggest that the
drivers of complexity can be grouped into three distinct classes. First, changes in
operating parameters or the facts on which the industry is based, such as the
availability of financing, population growth and labour forces, evidently play a role.
Second, the industry’s internal organisation – how the work is organised among its
actors – plays a crucial role in its dynamics, as more and more actors enter, and
decision rights and competencies are distributed rather than centralised. Third, we
can observe changes in societal expectations, in how our shared intentions and
purposes are conceptualised and put into play. This manifests in everything from
political discussions, laws, construction site banter and arguments all the way down
to contractual clauses and the individual homebuyer’s willingness to pay for a certain
standard, spec or finish.
This general taxonomy roughly corresponds to a Peircean stratified, cognitive
phenomenology (Dinesen, 1991; Peirce, 1955), where the structure of any
phenomenon or the content of thoughts is analysed according to 1) their reference to
observable facts, 2) how they are actualised or acted out, and 3) a context of
interpretation, such as a metric, a particular value chain or a language. This
taxonomy is merely an anticipation of the theoretical framework later articulated in
this dissertation.
1.1.2.2.1 Changes in operating parameters
The factual operating parameters – or the constitutive facts of the AEC industry – are
in constant flux. The individual factors are either growing or declining, slowly or
rapidly, and some are even disappearing as new factors appear. Foremost among
the facts that shape the industry are the changes in material conditions such as
17
building material availability (often reflected in cost), available land resources
(building ground and prices), climate (especially rapid climatic changes) and
available workforce (connected to the available skills in a population or geographic
area). Factual, physical changes in the building market also affect the industry, for
instance by how population growth increases the demand for housing and how
urbanisation versus rural settlement actually changes landscapes, travel times and
environmental factors (sewage, pollution, waste management) that have a physical
component.
Most of these operating parameters can be quantified and measured, and changes
over time can be mapped. The actual effects, which always have a scale, are not
necessarily proportionate to the actual quantifiable change, however, as constraints
and thresholds might be reached and encountered, meaning there will always be
qualitative changes following in the wake of quantitative changes in the basic
framework conditions. Changes in the facts lead to new facts as well as to changes
in degree. This is a curious characteristic of complexity, and it emerges not only from
relations and interpretations; it is also observable on the most basic level of facts
(because of the scale of the phenomenon).
1.1.2.2.2 Changes in organisation
The internal organisation of the enterprise of building is constantly and rapidly
changing. Changes in organisation might be natural reflections of changes in the
factual constituents (input) of the industry, but there is hardly any causality in this
matter, as human society and life in general might be moving towards a higher
degree of organisation, regardless of and despite the effects this might have on the
functionality of the industry. It would be downright naïve or simplistic to think that the
change in organisation simply reflects changes in the facts or needs, as it often is
conceptualised. Changes in the organisational constitution of the AEC industry is a
contributor to complexity. Human organisation has its own purposes and can hardly
be equated with rationality and the solution of challenges. Organisation, and
especially changes in organisational forms, comes with its own very special breed of
complexity. Changes in the following factors have had, and still have, undeniable
consequences on every operative construction site and project office in the country:
fragmentation and delegation of responsibility and labour, which in turn are
connected to increasing specialisation (which in turn is a wider societal trend).
Digitalisation, the supposed purpose of which is to increase efficiency and
transparency, is currently changing daily life for everybody involved in the industry.
Information is stored, accessed and documented in an increasing number of digital
platforms which often are not coordinated, but rather reflect different intentions,
professional boundaries, phases of productions and even systems of communication
and languages. As in many other industries and institutions, digitalisation is regarded
with much hope, but in the current state, due to the lack of common standards and –
critically for this research – formalisation of knowledge, digitalisation remains a driver
of complexity rather than an end-all solution.
Finally, a critical aspect of the internal organisation of the building industry that
currently is causing unheard-of complexity is communication: not only
communication across languages (due to an international labour market) or across
18
professional competencies and roles (such as economics, engineering, skilled
trades, law and architecture) but also communication directly reflecting decision
rights and the ‘right to misunderstand and under-communicate‘ (crossing both moral
and ethical borders; we are talking about lying. Yes, lying) and, finally,
communication across the time spans of a building project. Time is always a driver of
complexity, and anything more or less than the right amount of time in a given
organisational network (or complex evolutionary system, whether it be an intelligent
learning system or a non-responsive war zone) will increase and impact complexity
levels beyond belief. Currently, there is no agreement around this concept of ‘right
amount of time‘, since quicker is often regarded as more profitable but – even if
people like to forget this fact – more risky. Too slow is always regarded as a waste
(of time and money, which usually is financed by lending/debt, which in turn makes
costs dependent on time, regardless of what is actually happening in the physical
production). Even if time were not a factor in profit margins, the passing of time
simply makes people forget things, along with changes in human resources in the
project, which is an undeniable epistemological problem; if not in theory, then at least
in practice.
1.1.2.2.3 Changes in expectations
Changes in expectations on the AEC industry are connected to the development of
human knowledge, insights and of civilisation in general. These changes reflect the
universal topics of life: what we want, what we know and think we need, and what we
dream about (can imagine). The built environment plays a constitutive role in human
understanding. The relationship between the building and the expectations and
values that motivate their construction are fundamentally reflexive, or as Churchill
put it: ‘First we shape buildings, and then the buildings shape us‘. For this research
however, it is sufficient to note that factors such as changes in technology (and the
science behind technology), changes the expectations to the industry and thereby to
how we programme, design and execute buildings. Changes in lifestyle, often
propagated globally through the internet and mass media, alter our expectations to,
for instance, our homes and to what we are willing to pay for and pursue (e.g., the
market the industry caters to). Many of the expectations and intentions shaping the
industry are formalised into legal expressions and regulations. Increased regulation,
legal structures and procedures (in everything from building permits to litigation) are
perhaps the most concrete and telling expressions of how our expectations and
understanding are implemented in practice and effect the form, shape, content and
output of the industry. This form of complexity is a driver beyond the internal
organisation of the industry, because it also dips into societal expectations and
political decision processes outside the construction site.
1.1.2.3 Correlation between increasing complexity, project failure and decline in
productivity
In parallel with increasing complexity and fragmentation, research (Vrijhoef, 2011;
Hjelmbrekke & Lohne, 2014), government (NOU 2015) and the industry itself (Metier,
2016, 2017, 2019) have pointed out that building projects are increasingly failing to
deliver on time, on budget or on spec – and perhaps even on real needs. This
tendency also appears to manifest in decreased productivity and increased costs.
(Todsen, 2018).
19
A hypothetical correlation might be made here between the emergent complexity and
increase in project failures. The present rate of change (in complexity) appears to be
greater than the industry’s current ability to adapt in a functional manner to the
changes in its constitutive drivers. There is a discrepancy between the rate of
change in multiplicity and the combined ability to adapt to these changes.
Even if the immediate nature of this correlation between the multiplicity (and
increase) of complicating (influential) elements and project failures remains largely
unknown, undescribed and unexplored, it is hardly an exaggeration to say that there
are more elements that need to come together in a shorter time, involving more
agencies with influence and decisions rights and creating greater communication
and collaboration challenges than ever before witnessed in the industry, perhaps in
any industry, while the industry appears more fragmented, specialised and
heterogenous than ever.
1.1.3 Reactions: the pursuit of solutions
The industry’s responses and general attitude towards the challenges of emergent
complexity currently appear to one of a persistent pursuit of solutions, typically by
defining specific needs and solving them or by developing systems of solutions or
ways of doing things and managing people and information. A considerable body of
research (Samset, 2008; Williams & Samset, 2010; Williams et al., 2012; Samset &
Andersen, 2014; Samset & Volden, 2016; Wedell-Wedellsborg, 2017; Williams et al.,
2019) points towards problems with this approach, as it appears as if standard
industry practice is to look for a solution when faced with unknown problems
emerging from increasing complexity. The problem with solutions is that they depend
on having a well defined, well understood problem if they are to be effective.
Apparently, the current state of the industry is poorly understood. The emergent
complexity appears to be causing deeper problems, and the real challenge we are
facing is that of exploring the root causes of the problems we are trying to solve
before we try solving them or developing solutions.
1.1.4. Issues: the deeper root problems underneath project failure
1.1.4.1 The AEC industry lacks formalisation of its principles and methods for doing
so
Currently, at least two knowledge gaps complicate the inquiry into the root causes of
building project failure. Both concern our understanding, as conceptualised by von
Wright (1971) rather than our development of know-how and solutions. First, the
problem of exploring the root causes, which may be deeply entangled in underlying
mechanisms within the industry, represents a considerable methodical problem: how
to find, how to discover the underlying mechanisms of a project. Second, this
methodical challenge is again deeply entangled in a more comprehensive, universal
challenge or discrepancy that characterises the AEC industry, both in Norway and
globally: the industry lacks systematic formalisation. By formalisation I mean a
(systematic) description and clarification of how its (growing) multiplicity of elements
(building components and technical systems) and knowledge practices (such as
20
architecture, engineering, law, project management or economics) come together in
terms of human effort or action, across different incentives sources, agencies,
interests, responsibilities, legal frameworks and project time. This pre-eminent or
fundamental knowledge gap manifests in the absence of common standards,
information definitions and information qualification systems, and might be one of the
reasons why, for instance, quality control and standards have not been developed in
the AEC industry to the same degree as they have been in other large-scale
industries such as offshore oil and gas (Vrijhoef & Koskela, 2005).
1.1.4.2 Formalisation involves uncovering and resolving hierarchies of meaning in
the industry's current knowledge practices
A comprehensive formalisation of the industry’s knowledge integration principles
would imply developing a common language across a heterogeneous multiplicity of
elements. This hardly means finding the right descriptions – the resolution of
information stated in different linguistic forms – but rather a comprehensive
resolution of possibly incomparable modes of meaning or effects. It means
uncovering and formalising entire hierarchies of meaning, including, but not limited
to, the differences in interest and incentives, temporal issues, historical meaning and
cognitive distinctions between actions (means) and objects (ends).
1.1.4.3 The lack of formalisation as a universal trait of the industry
It is crucial to note that the lack of formalisation is not just a local project problem
(causing the individual project to fail, as often becomes the retrospective narrative in
the industry); it appears to be a universal feature characteristic of the contemporary
AEC industry. The industry appears to be developing into an increasingly
heterogeneous knowledge field, without a proper description of how its elements go
together and no (or few) systematic efforts towards universal formalisation of its
governing or underlying principles as a conglomerate of elements emerging from
various societal needs, wants, aims and potentials.
1.1.4.4 What constitutes common knowledge is not properly understood in the AEC
industry
The AEC industry cannot be said to lack solutions and how-how; rather, I suggest it
lacks description, which is the first step towards formalising its enabling principles,
especially on the epistemic level. Given the nature and consequences of the
enterprise, the urgency of the matter cannot be exaggerated. It is simply
discomforting that one of the biggest industries in the world lacks a proper
understanding of the knowledge practice it represents.
The lack of understanding comes with a hefty price tag. Misunderstandings are
currently costing the industry millions, if not billions, on a global scale. The lack of
proper formalisation of how different elements can be integrated across stakeholder
perspectives, project times and professional backgrounds simply means that,
regardless of whether or not buildings are being built, we lack the vocabulary to
discuss what constitutes unifying knowledge in this process. This obviously has
critical consequences for what can, and currently is, communicated successfully in
21
the industry. Massive losses are probably taken due to the lack of common concepts
of what works, what can or cannot be integrated, and how.
1.2 Approach: adding perspective to solutions as a
research strategy
1.2.1 Adding an epistemological perspective
Fundamentally, this research aims to add perspective to solutions, or even more
specifically, it aims to add an epistemic perspective to the production of solutions. A
systematic formalisation of the relation between different aspects of the industry
should in theory be fully continuous with (and supportive of) the ongoing pursuit of
solutions.
Aligning the overall philosophical purpose – which in itself needs no motivation other
than intellectual curiosity – with the actual observed challenges of the industry leads
us to a somewhat roundabout approach to the unseen root problems of the AEC
industry. When solutions hardly solve the problem but rather appear to generate new
ones), developing a better understanding of the underlying mechanisms contributing
not only to the problems but also to available solutions appears to be a viable
approach. At least in theory.
Furthermore, formalising our understanding of current knowledge practices is hardly
a polemic approach to current industry practices. Rather than replacing current
solutions, this research aims to develop a supportive framework. It is not specifically
new knowledge that is needed, nor the replacement of old beliefs. A systematic
description of current practices is likely to contribute to a deeper understanding of
the mechanisms causing the root problem. Part of our aim is to gain insights into the
theoretical and philosophical grounding and depth of contemporary industry
practices.
This perspective consists of two conceptual steps. First, I suggest leaving the
normative stance on multidisciplinarity and knowledge and instead – as called for by
Lang (1987) – aim to document, describe and formalise existing knowledge as it is
practised. Second, this means that we must develop specific methods for doing so,
since the knowledge we seek is not necessarily of an agreed upon, explicit nature.
Rather, this knowledge exists within the practices of the industry. It is typically
expressed through actions and the massive information exchange generated by the
daily business of the industry.
1.2.2 Formalising existing knowledge
In short, by formalisation in this context I refer to descriptive and analytic measures
undertaken to understand how things are done as opposed to generating new knowhow. Analytically, such research is not comparable to solution production. Rather, it
concerns itself with the documentation and articulation of already existing
knowledge, particularly the underlying epistemological mechanism enabling
knowledge integration between different competencies and responsibilities in
practice.
22
The AEC industry is affected by power struggles, misunderstandings, petty rivalries
and even ill-will and deep-rooted disagreements. This distinguishes the problem of
formalising industry knowledge from a purely theoretical problem. Such inconvenient,
unorderly factors cannot be abstracted away from the inquiry because these are
indeed part of the epistemic problem faced daily on the construction site and in
project offices. If we chose to look away from these factors, we would be describing
and formalising another phenomenon altogether. Consequently, we need to
incorporate such distortive aspects into our circumscription of the phenomenon and
then develop tools for handling them; filters and analytic gradients sensitive to the
nature of the circumscribed phenomenon. Vagueness and gradients are bound to be
a part of the description of the AEC industry as a knowledge phenomenon, since this
is a part of the problem and therefore must influence the learning and production
process.
The aim of this research is hardly to describe the industry in terms of assumed
agreements and idealised scenarios. Rather, it is to understand what unifies where
agreement fails or cannot be assumed. Instead of assuming agreement or a logical
system of order, this research begins with the assumption that there must be certain
principles or ways of acting within the industry that enable the actors to participate
with their knowledge regardless of what motivates them or how they understand the
industry and its other participants.
There are at least four plausible reasons why such an industry-wide methodological
inquiry has not been conducted:
First, industry leaders have all been focused on solving the manifold practical
challenges before them. In other words, they have been busy developing the tacit
logic in use to cope with practical, actual challenges as they have occurred and as
the industry has grown more complex.
Second, formalising an industry logic unavoidably implies transgressing professional
borders in a competitive environment where all parties are dependent on goodwill
and reputation. Articulating common denominators between and across all the
angles at play in the contemporary building industry would quickly lead to
transgressions of professional, institutional and academic frameworks, evoking
political defence mechanisms akin to Lakatosian research projects (Lakatos, 1978).
An analysis done from any one perspective within this process would unavoidably
imply that the researcher would be analysing what ‘the others‘ are doing and, thus,
not only minding his own business (quite literally).
Third, the problem of formalising knowledge integration could easily be interpreted
as a practical problem of establishing (and enforcing) a common goal, intention or
meaning across agencies with different interests, knowledge and success criteria.
This mix-up is far from trivial because such a common goal appears to be
increasingly implausible proportional to the number of agencies involved. The
challenge of integrating knowledge (if a common goal is taken as a premise for
integration across agencies) can be taken to be too difficult to achieve as an act of
egalitarian collaboration, if not downright impossible. On construction sites, we are
currently facing economic competition, leading to lawsuits between traditionally
23
distinct professional interfaces, such as between plumbers, electricians and
carpenters, due to fuzzy interdependencies during (high-speed) production.
The counterargument against this interpretation, however, is similar to the first
reason, i.e., that it is a practical interpretation of the knowledge integration challenge
as something that must be solved on the practical level of the individual project,
meaning that it calls for a methodical improvement of the logic in use as opposed to
a universal formalisation of knowledge principles that would improve our
understanding and therefore provide perspective. The problem of establishing
common goals across agencies in a building project should not be confused with the
aim of investigating the (existing) epistemological characteristics that transcend
different agencies in this practically minded process.
Fourth, the lack of universal knowledge formalisation or any other kind of
epistemological reflections on the unified principles of the contemporary building
industry might be caused by the abstraction level associated with these kinds of
problems. The development of logic and epistemological reflection is typically found
within the philosophical domain. It is typically a job for philosophers. The
philosophers, however, appear not to be particularly motivated for this messy job – at
least not until now. In summary, the problem of building industry knowledge
integration appears to be stuck between abstraction levels. It remains too abstract to
be addressed as a practical problem of handling the building process, as indicated
by our quick review of the general strategies of the leading building management
agencies. Yet, due to its highly pragmatic nature, the problem has not attracted the
attention of professional philosophical analysis.
The starting position of this research is therefore that the building industry is
currently missing a proper – or even partial – formalisation of knowledge. This is not
necessarily because the industry is especially short-sighted, anti-philosophical or unacademic, since several plausible reasons for this knowledge gap, once identified,
can be given. The problem of unifying knowledge in the building industry is frankly a
hard one, given the very practical setting of its problem. Currently, it is all too easy to
confuse a need for developments in the ever-growing operational logic in use with a
more formal reconstruction of its principles. And what makes the malady even worse
is that the effort of addressing this knowledge gap hardly comes with any promises
of making daily life in the architect’s studio, the city planning office or the
construction site any easier right away. The utility of knowledge formalisation is not
aiming to solve any specific problems within the industry as they occur and are
observable to its actors (that is what improvement of the logic-in-use is about).
An advantage of a comprehensive formalisation of knowledge shows in the new
vantage points it enables. Its contribution to industry knowledge is through an
increased understanding, as von Wright (1971) distinguished this from any causal
explanations and predictions. With improvements in understanding, one comes to
see new connections and dynamics between existing scopes, problems and
methods that characterise human behaviour. Understanding is always concerned
with the (created) patterns in human conduct, and is therefore always self-reflective
as opposed to causal, as pointed out by Vico (1744) already in the 18th century.
What it provides is not direct solutions, but rather freedom (Kaplan, 1998, p. 24).
Freedom in how one understands, frames and learns in order to implicitly become
more capable in applying the logic-in-use. Abraham Kaplan (1998, p. 24), drawing on
24
Max Weber’s concept of methodology, likens the understanding, much in
accordance with von Wright, to the freedom which aesthetics provides the practising
artist. It is not a tool he uses to craft his artwork, yet it enriches his world and his
work alike. It is an expansion of his field; a sophistication of his vision and his
audience’s vision. Aesthetics represents greater opportunities for interpretation of his
work and its context. It is a refinement of vision. Like ornithology to the birds, a
reconstructed logic is only helpful by implication. It provides the other, such as the
bird watcher, – the potential preservationist – with a framework for understanding the
bird’s behaviour in its natural element. It hardly aims to be helpful by teaching the
bird new methods for being a better, more efficient bird, nor by making material
improvements of its habitat, such as building birdhouses and fountains. The latter
would at best be a strategic anthropomorphism of the bird’s life, and thus a
projection of the bird watcher’s self on the bird – and this is the antithesis of
understanding.
1.2.3 Developing methods of formalisation
To be able to formalise existing knowledge that may or may not be explicit in the
everyday industry parlance, we need a way of discovering these underlying
mechanisms or features of industry practices. Basically, we need a way of seeing
into the structures of practice. In a scientific language, this means developing some
method for generating a hypothesis concerning the nature of knowledge. We need a
transparent, replicable way of theorising from empirical reality. This has at least three
aspects or steps. First, we need to inspect the industry information in terms of its
knowledge content or qualifying aspects. Second, we need a way of discovering
(underlying or perhaps hidden) patterns; similarities and differences that may
correspond to common denominators. And third, these patterns should be explained
(or explainable by) some principles or abductions that can be tested in practice, in
the later verification process.
The main theoretical challenge of this research consists of developing an operative
logic of inquiry. The challenge of formalising practical knowledge in a transparent
way invokes three interconnected levels of analysis: the epistemological, the
phenomenological and, finally, as a theory of science problem. Resolving the
epistemological aspect consist of outlining a theoretical object of
knowledge/attention/integration that would correspond to a shared epistemology
between agencies in the industry. At the phenomenological level, we need to
articulate how we aim to study the structure of the collective phenomenon, a
phenomenology of a collective horizon of action. The purpose of fleshing out the
analytical phenomenological apparatus is to enable the theoretical analysis to meet
the empirical reality in a mediating model. This is also the basis of our analytical
technique or method. Here, we develop a mediating structure, an analytical construct
that directs our attention towards the structure of the phenomenon (how it works). By
(visually) juxtapositioning the individual phenomenological analysis, we finally
produce an analytical, comparative model where patterns of similarity in and
difference between the individual pieces of information become salient. Finally, due
to the pioneering character of this work – the theory of science aspect of this
research demands reflection and must in itself be formalised so as to outline what
kind of theory framework this research vocabulary finally proves to be, including its
main logical modus, scientific status (demarcation criteria) and lineage.
25
1.3 Placing: situating the research on Poincaré’s
knowledge curve
Fundamentally, this work is an analytical, descriptive one. The abstraction level is
philosophical. From a theory of science perspective, this research concerns the
relationship between data-driven exploration and formalisation as these two activities
pertain to the process of discovery and knowledge development in general. It is the
theoretical relationship between these activities that are the focus of this research –
and that of verification. It is particularly the difference between trial-and-error
exploration, method development (formalisation) and application–verification phases
of research and knowledge development that need to be established and
accentuated to fully appreciate and understand the nuances of this research. The
nature of the research gaps this research addresses means that following a set of
pre-established rules or deductive principles is out of the question. They simply
appear to be lacking. There is little or no established analytical footing in the
empirical phenomenon, meaning that both description and analysis are lacking. Part
of the aim of this work is to start establishing some ground rules for exploring the
AEC industry as a knowledge phenomenon. However, no toolsets for doing so
currently exist; they needed to be designed, and this has been the main research
aim.
The science of discovery lies in constraining, but not controlling, exploration.
According to the French mathematician Henry Poincaré, who accentuated the early
intuitive aspect of learning, the process of formalising, contextualising and working
out the details of the discovery (of a solution to a certain problem) only follows a less
controlled or conscious (goal-oriented) process. The actuality of Poincaré’s
perspective has recently been rearticulated and generalised by Stanley and Lehman
(2015) in their beautiful exposition of constraint-based thinking in the context of
computer science and artificial learning. Poincaré’s generalised description of a
process of discovery, however, was as follows:
26
Figure 1-1. The knowledge curve illustrating the four phases of discovery, based on
Henri Poincaré’s notion of intuition’s role in discovery. Adapted from Barile &
Saviano (2013).
The take-home point here is that the articulation of rules need not necessarily (to be
scientific) be pre-determined or done before, as in a research blueprint, be it
theoretical or methodical. When placing the current research in this overall scheme,
the research as an intuitive, explorative, trial-and-error process corresponds to the
first two phases of Poincaré’s scheme, while the formalisation of the method
developed over the course of this process is constituted by three mutually supporting
elements; the theory section is a reconstruction of an emergent logic of inquiry, the
method becomes the formalisation of research technique developed while working
(in an explorative fashion) with empirical input, and finally, as this research concerns
‘how to open the AEC industry to epistemological inquiry, based on its own
information‘, the result became the formalisation of a layered logic of discovery
which, based on the output of the technique, enables us to generate some verifiable
or falsifiable abductive hypotheses concerning the nature of knowledge integration in
the contemporary Norwegian building industry.
Figure 1-2. In terms of Poincaré’s knowledge curve, this research lies in the first to
third phases of knowledge development. Considerable time has been spent in trialand-error exploration to establish some productive footing in phenomenon and the
empirical data. Three further formalisations of these explorations are presented in
this dissertation, establishing a multi-layered formal structure for exploring a
practical-productive knowledge phenomenon like the AEC industry: first, a theoretical
grounding in terms of an overall logic of inquiry, enabling a generalised empirical
technique synthesised from working with industry data, and finally an outline of a
logic of discovery, a systematic way of generating hypotheses or abductions based
on the empirical output of the technique.
27
The knowledge curve will be used throughout the dissertation, both as a roadmap
and as an analytical tool for placing and relating the research. First in relation to
inference forms in the theory section and articulating the logic of inquiry, then to
situate and discuss the research design in the method section. Finally, it is also
useful to refer to the knowledge curve when discussing the limitations of the
research as well as when discussing future research potential.
1.4 Value: benefits of adding an epistemological
perspective on knowledge interfaces of the AEC industry
1.4.1 New observations: descriptions of knowledge phenomenon
Generally, the most basic value contribution I hope to achieve with this work is
enabling fact-based, analytic observations of industry practices that can help us
untangle some of the root problems the industry currently is facing. By drawing on
the industry's own data – data which currently are part of the operative processes –
we aim to make epistemology meet the industry on empirical grounds instead of
relying solely on professional or research narratives.
Instead of attacking the operative problems directly, my intuition is that there are
valuable insights to be had if we can describe how the industry's many knowledge
interfaces are being resolved.
If we can describe the principles that enable different disciplines, stakes and
interests to overcome their differences and produce buildings, we should be better
equipped to both spot and resolve dysfunctions too, without postulating the need for
new methods and systems which just as well may distort the natural processes and
knowledge landscape of the industry.
Descriptive knowledge is not the same as operative know-how, but if it can be based
on the same input or data (and documented facts), it can help us understand aspects
of practice that demand second-level thinking without resolving to abstract
speculation.
With a descriptive epistemological approach, I hope to deliver value both in the form
of hypotheses concerning the working principles of the industry and in new
observations of the deeper dysfunctions that may be lurking under the surface of
habits and daily struggles on the construction site.
1.4.2 Developing a vocabulary: enabling empirical knowledge analysis in the
AEC industry
Investing time and energy in developing a robust analytical platform for analysing
knowledge in the AEC industry is not just about enabling this dissertation. Rather, it
represents an investment in future research opportunities. The vocabulary,
techniques and logic developed here can open new doors and roads into future
research and inquiries previously not pursued by neither industry practitioners nor
researchers.
28
Enabling the analysis of knowledge using industry data basically entails being able to
produce robust, documented, data-driven insights from any available source (or
medium) currently in use in the industry. Developing a vocabulary to do so effectively
opens a vast empirical data stream which up to now has gone virtually untapped. A
vast array of documents and databases will potentially become available for
analysis.
Another upside to developing an analytical vocabulary at the epistemological level is
that it enables us to compare the AEC industry practices with other industries, given
that we achieve a sufficiently high abstraction level. Theoretically, achieving a
sufficiently abstract framework should also enable us to compare the Norwegian
context with other national and international situations, thereby contributing
methodically to an international research field, even if the empirical data in our pilot
studies only cover the Norwegian industry. Building a proper theoretical platform for
description also means connecting the AEC industry theoretically to other existing
approaches to knowledge and to systematic behaviour analysis.
Finally, an implicit aspect of developing a more abstract framework for describing
and formalising the AEC industry is that it would be a contribution to the theoretical
foundations for digitalisation. The ambitions for what wholesale digitalisation might
mean to industry efficiency, profitability and execution are numerous, but given that
my fundamental thesis is correct, the theoretical platform for ensuring that we know
what we are doing and how we effect existing knowledge practices (that remain
largely undescribed) by digitalisation is largely lacking. An analytic epistemological
perspective on industry knowledge interfaces would be a step towards a common
digital platform for building information, regardless of stakes, affiliation and discipline.
1.4.3 Enabling new tools: bridging epistemological descriptions and industry
applications
In this work I regard the challenge of linking analytic descriptions to industry
applications as an integral part of both the conceptual challenge and the end goal.
To fully meet the challenge postulated in the thesis, the work must produce or
demonstrate viable approaches to applying the empirically based epistemological
perspective to (improving) industry practices. This is not the same as postulating that
there is currently something wrong with the industry.
Given that we can both develop analytical descriptions of existing knowledge
interfaces and infer the wider impacts of intervening in them, working with empirical
data (instead of pure theoretical speculation) comes with the distinct advantage that
we might develop our own platform, algorithms and eventually software and services
for managing knowledge live in the industry rather than just after the fact.
One of the main areas where linking analytical descriptions to knowledge practice
would be valuable is in the digitalisation of the building process, particularly in
information management; how to manage the information resources that currently
are under-utilised in the building process.
A philosophical perspective on method and tool development is valuable to the
digitalisation of the AEC, not only because it adds perspective where operative
29
concerns traditionally hold most sway, but also because the abstraction level
associated with different kinds of knowledge and interfaces demands second-level
thinking.
My intuition is that a (applied) data-driven epistemological perspective can be used
to develop knowledge management tools based on the analysis and visualisation of
existing data. By tapping into the vast stream or cloud of existing building information
and viewing it from an analytical perspective rather than a purely operative one, new
structures and patterns may emerge that previously have remained unconnected.
Here, adding artificial learning (AI) can provide even greater benefits, since machine
learning can detect patterns in data which human actors typically overlook. Tapping
into the power of AI in information management in the AEC, however, only works if
the basic algorithm manages to span the gap between observation and application,
which needs an epistemological abstraction level. It needs to be operative in its
purpose, yet epistemological in its perspective.
This research aims to deliver on this level and potentially provide tremendous value
to some of the most ambitious innovation efforts in today’s industry.   

2. VOCABULARY
Enabling an epistemological perspective on interfaces between actors in the AEC
industry
This chapter aims to establish a theoretical vocabulary sufficient to describe
universal epistemic characteristics of the AEC industry. By universal, I point towards
enabling knowledge mechanisms; the shared, common denominators between
industry actors. Furthermore, the immediate purpose of establishing this vocabulary
is to develop and adapt existing empirical methods suitable to studying the unique
features of the industry. Basically, this chapter contains an analytical procedure akin
to an axiomatic deduction, followed by a basic philosophical classification of this
vocabulary. It should be emphasised that in this first stage of dealing with AEC
epistemology, all that we aim for is an operative vocabulary. This is in contrast to a
comprehensive, coherent theory of knowledge in the construction industry, a
distinction that will be elaborated later in this chapter.
The analytical procedure structuring this chapter is as follows:
1. IF – articulating and constraining the theoretical problem
2. THEN – designing a theoretical response to the problem
3. SO – classifying this design within a philosophical context
The first part (IF) deals with the premises of the theoretical analysis. First, we
establish the theoretical knowledge gap and its constraints. Second, we elaborate on
the nature of these constraints, their relevance and how they can be handled. The
third step is defining the natural scope of the epistemological inquiry in terms of
expected (plausible) output, based on an observation of the current state of the
industry, also reflecting the constraints. Finally, we articulate the three logical levels
that need to be distinguished in this vocabulary in order to maintain the integrity of
the empirical phenomenon studied.
30
The second part (THEN) responds to the constraints by means of a theoretical
design. It consists of a phenomenological framing of the industry which in turn
delivers the premises to an epistemological analysis of the (in theory) common
denominators of the AEC industry production process. Finally, this section concludes
with some reflections on the scientific characteristic and status of the theoretical
approach.
Part 3 (SO) concerns classifying the theoretical platform arrived at in this chapter.
Basically, we place the vocabulary in its philosophical context. Here we reflect upon
the underlying naturalism of the inquiry as well as the pragmatic (action–
philosophical) attitude towards phenomena, meaning information and knowledge as
well as inquiry and discovery in general. Understanding the pragmatic attitude is
critical to the reader – and future user – because it permeates this theoretical
vocabulary and, consequently, the perspective, limitations and output of the entire
research.
2.1 Premises
2.1.1 Establishing a theoretical foundation for formalisation
The contemporary AEC industry lacks systematic formalisation of its enabling logics
and knowledge content. By formalisation, I mean a systematic description of how
different knowledge contributions and elements come together and contribute to the
industrial production of buildings. Currently, the industry also lacks a functional
epistemic vocabulary to describe any of its unifying aspects as a knowledge
phenomenon. Consequently, to start addressing this as a research gap, we need to
establish a theoretical foundation for the formalisation of shared mechanisms in
heterogeneous knowledge phenomena, such as the AEC industry.
There are certain conditions such a theoretical platform needs to be sensitive to.
First, the challenge lies in describing and referring to what is happening in the AEC
industry today as distinct from what should be happening. This means that such an
inquiry must not only be empirically grounded, but also empirically driven. The
primary research task consists of reconstructing existing – but possibly tacit or
inexplicit – knowledge as opposed to postulating the need for new knowledge or
principles, which would correspond to a normative approach rather than a descriptive
one. The problem demands empirically driven formulation of hypotheses concerning
existing compression points in the industry’s knowledge landscape or structure.
Compression is here understood in the sense Schmidhuber (2010) describes as
motivation in learning processes in neural memory structures with limited processing
capacity. New solutions, postulated without accounting for how the phenomenon (the
industry) works, are just as likely to avoid the deeper root problems as to address
them.
Second, to approach the underlying mechanisms of knowledge integration in the
AEC industry means acknowledging and handling epistemic heterogeneity as a
fundamental constraint on formalisation instead of trying to diminish its importance or
artificially reduce it. Both these approaches would represent a normative stance, or
31
at best an applied approach to knowledge, not a descriptive one, which is the core of
the suggested approach. The AEC industry is lacking formalisation, partly because it
is lacking a proper epistemic description, a consequence of lacking a proper
theoretical foundation for making such a description. The position of this research is
that a fundamental description of what is going on is needed before changes can be
made. The formalisation problem is not a solution problem or lack thereof. The
purpose of this approach is launching an inquiry into the deeper nature and
mechanisms of the integrative, epistemic aspects of the industrial phenomenon.
2.1.2 Empirical analysis of building information
2.1.2.1 Building information as empirical manifestation of knowledge in the AEC
industry
In practical terms, the empirical constraint on this research means that the
theoretical platform must enable a bottom-up descriptive approach to AEC industry
knowledge based on the industry’s own interactions. These manifest in many forms,
but are generally, and increasingly, well documented and available as building and
project information. Interestingly, this vast empirical source of how the industry works
on a daily basis appears to be largely untapped and unexploited analytically. Using
building information as a primary data source holds clear advantages over other
empirical reports and sources, since building information constitutes not just
opinions, but also what actually makes a difference in a typical building project. This
resonates strongly with the one of the primary constraints of formalisation: the
analysis needs to be based on a description of what is really happening; as opposed
to merely postulating what should be happening in a better, more altruistic and
efficient world.
Building information contains knowledge, but often in indirect ways. The unifying
aspect of information in the AEC industry is not necessarily found in purely
descriptive statements, equivalent to the traditional philosophical notion of
knowledge as statements of justified, true beliefs. Unifying knowledge – what unifies
in practice – is more likely to be indirectly represented in the know-how of the
industry. How this know-how manifests in the information exchange, however,
remains the critical challenge. To address this challenge, we need a way to view
industry information in terms of its epistemic aspect, a way of making the indirect
knowledge aspects of information explicit.
2.1.2.2 Discovering the epistemic aspects of information
To formalise integration principles, we need a theoretical foundation that recognises
that what we are formalising is the possibly tacit know-how aspects of building
information. Fundamentally, what is needed is an information classification system
that emphasises the epistemic aspects of information that is recognisable across the
multiplicity of interests, competencies and stakes that currently characterise the AEC
industry.
2.1.3 Establishing heterogeneity as an epistemic constraint rather than a
problem
32
I propose that the contemporary AEC industry, quite regardless of its past, now
appears to be a heterogeneous knowledge phenomenon. Knowledge that previously
may have been managed by the Architect with a capital A is now distributed across
numerous specialised agencies. There are fundamentally different kinds of
knowledge, such as material know-how, management of information classes, and
systems and levels of reasoning, that go into the contemporary building project. A
project involves interior design, plumbing, finance, carpentry, contract law, welding,
and information management. And it remains hard, if not impossible, to imagine this
multiplicity to be reduced to one kind or type, making up the physical building, the
project information and the thinking enabling it.
Still, I am not convinced that all attempts, formal or informal, to describe AEC
industry knowledge duly acknowledge the phenomenon they attempt to describe to
be a thoroughly heterogeneous enterprise, spanning from aesthetic concerns of a
façade to mechanical ventilation and soundproofing, with respect to what it takes in
terms of human skills and ingenuity to make it all come together. At least some
approaches of project management, or indeed information management by means of
databases and systems, do not fully acknowledge this feature of the industry in
attempts to manage it and make it more efficient – to their own detriment and that of
other actors.
Consequently, for the sake of good order, I find it necessary to include an argument
for the case of heterogeneity as an epistemic condition of the contemporary AEC
industry, and logically, therefore, it must be accounted for as a constraint in an
epistemic study of the matter. In this research I regard the industry’s heterogeneity of
knowledge as a fundamental condition rather than a problem to be solved. It should
be accounted for and understood. Wishing it away will not help us address the root
problems of the industry nor aid us in discovering underlying knowledge mechanisms
in the growing complexities.
I argue that from the epistemological perspective, heterogeneity must be dealt with
as a de facto constraint – something we work within – both when we try to describe
and attempt to understand the phenomenon and, arguably, in practice.
Heterogeneity is hardly a superficial ‘something else’ that can be abstracted away. I
argue that heterogeneity prevails all the way, from the bricks and mortar up to the
level of reasoning, and should be an acknowledged constraint on the (applied and
theoretical) epistemology of the business of making buildings.
By heterogeneity, or by designating the industry as heterogenous, I mean that the
constitutive parts – the various conceptual and concrete content – of the AEC
industry are of different kinds, if not metaphysically, then at least epistemologically. I
ague that these various constitutive elements do not necessarily function or could be
understood according to the same cognitive rules, mechanisms or reasons. This
argument could possibly be established formally or statistically by randomly sampling
elements (bricks, pipes, wires, elevator shafts, handrails, radiators, routers, etc.),
information pieces (that make a difference) or arguments sampled anytime in the
building project and by testing whether these adhere to the same category or mode
of reasoning; essentially, whether they have more, or less, in common. Since such
an inventory of the typical AEC project is yet to be assembled, even less classified,
the statistical test seems rather far-fetched and abstract, which is counter-productive,
33
considering that the point of the argument is quite concrete, i.e. that buildings and
the process of making them consist of the assembly of different kinds of materials,
managing different kinds of information, using multiple, different kinds of logic or
systems of reasoning. So instead of attempting a formal proof before we have
established a satisfactory inventory – a future research topic in its own right – I will
try to show by a stratified argument that heterogeneity is indeed an epistemic
condition because it prevails at several levels (of abstraction) when observing the
workings of the industry.
This argument can be summarised as following:
Heterogeneity is systematic in the AEC industry as opposed to a superficial
appearance because it prevails at several levels of elements, such as different kinds
of building components, of information, and of logic, such as coexisting systems of
reasoning.
My argument is that if we can show that heterogeneity prevails at several levels of
abstraction, we should treat is as a systematic condition rather than a random,
superficial or incidental appearance that can be abstracted, ignored or wished away.
In the following, I will attempt to provide a basic description of the typical
heterogeneity one encounters in each of these levels of abstraction, from concrete
things to information about things, to systems of reasoning about them. These
examples will only provide a weak, inductive argument for heterogeneity on each of
these levels. And these examples remain open to counterargument. For a
counterargument to be convincing, however, it must not only disprove the example
as a case of heterogeneity, but must also provide a more compelling argument
proving that the level in question is indeed homogeneous. And even if
counterarguments can be mounted at one level, the thesis of heterogeneity will not
be refuted unless all three levels can be established to be homogeneous and stable.
To my sensibilities, such an argument is much less conceivable than finding
examples of heterogeneity at each level, and thus I am somewhat reliant on
Occam’s razor to fortify my inductive reasoning. It seems more complicated to
maintain that the industry consists of only one kind of physical element, one kind of
information and one kind of reasoning – in the long run – without committing any
promiscuous generalisations or deflations concerning the nature of the kinds
mentioned or the facts typically encountered in building projects.
2.1.3.1 Establishing heterogeneity at the level of elements
The AEC industry deals in, and with, different kinds of elements that contribute to the
function of the building in different ways. At this most basic level, heterogeneity is
also at its most obvious. Some elements create space. Some are membranes with
functions best known to professionals. Some are electrical components enabling the
users to connect to the internet. Some are parts of remote or automatic ventilation
control systems.
A classical understanding of architecture typically concerns the organisation of
space. But a building also concerns temperature control, heat recycling, internet
access, water filtering, etc. And most of these components are not even known,
34
much less experienced or handled, by end users. This also goes for the construction
workers. Even if you played an instrumental role in building the formwork for the
elevator shafts, which indeed provide structure to the entire building, you probably
know little about what goes on inside a fan coil – and prefer it that way. The
assembly of different elements in a typical building project, often referred to as
building components and systems, require different competencies because they are
numerous and of different kinds. On top of purely technical and economic
considerations, the successful assembly of components and systems also holds the
potential of achieving architectural beauty. And most buildings, regardless of their
purpose, usually are evaluated for their beauty at one point or another.
2.1.3.2 Heterogeneity on the level of information
A mathematical notion of information (Shannon & Weaver,1949) is useful, especially
in the coding, storage and distribution of knowledge, but can also be deceiving if it
oversimplifies epistemically relevant information in a multidisciplinary environment,
such as the contemporary building industry.
Regardless of one’s level of sophistication, it is hard to argue that there is only one
type of information. Even if we rely on Bateson’s broad notion that information is a
difference that makes a difference (Bateson, 2000; Queiroz & Emmeche, 2008),
these important differences come in different kinds in terms of how they inform the
process, both qualitatively and qualitatively.
Operationally, there is more than one kind of information that makes a difference
during a typical building project. By this I mean there are not just many sources,
messages or topics of information in play. From a theoretical perspective, applying
Peirce’s phenomenology of mental content, or phaneroscopy (Peirce, 1955; De
Tienne, 2004), there are at least three different classes of information, based on how
something makes a difference: information about qualities, about relations or about
references.
1. Qualities: Information pertaining to conceptual effects as experiential qualities.
This is information that refers to characteristics of some feature of the building
process in itself, its qualities as they are available to users’ experience or
characteristics that can be understood in terms of the building element alone.
2. Relations: Information describing conceptual differences in terms of brute
factual effects. Things that typically can be measured and quantified, such as
distances in the physical neighbourhood of the project or actual space-temporal
happenings during the process that casually shaped the outcome of the project.
3. References: Referential information is any symbolic difference that made an
impact on the concept development. Anything that is established socially or
represent a social agreement. This can be financial differences, agreements or
contracts, actual reference projects or just human relations shaping the process
or inspiring the product (by simile or difference).
And then, as the AEC industry is a practical, production-oriented activity, there are
two different ways these differences can be measured: either with respect to making
a difference to the physical building produced or to the process of making it.
Sometimes it remains impossible to distinguish between process and physical
35
output, since both can be counted as output. Some information is unambiguous in its
consequence for the finished building, such as colour, etc., whereas other
information, such as progress planning or work hours, cannot be experienced in any
way by the end user, other than indirectly, as in had it not been for this crucial
process information, the building might not have been finished in time.
2.1.3.3 Heterogeneity on the level of logic
On the surface, the operative consequence of heterogeneity appears to be a
constant power struggle or full-on war between knowledge traditions and their
respective alignment with the economic, legal, aesthetic and social concerns crucial
to buildings. In this research, I assume the position that this happens precisely
because there is hardly just one kind of proof, argument or reasoning that is valid for
– or better – useful to accomplishing the finial building on time and on budget.
Several systems of reasoning coexist in the typical building project. On the level of
logic – understood here as systems of reasoning, argument and evidence – there
are often both beneficial and problematic tensions in the AEC industry.
These different logics are not necessarily competing or in opposition, even if often
perceived to be. Part of their function is to resist and balance each other, since a
building naturally consists of many values for different uses that may change and
adapt significantly over time. These systems sometimes are at work simultaneously
or may work on different levels (upstream or downstream) or affect different kinds of
information, concern different actions (skills), building components, systems or
compositions. Because of the fundamental nature of buildings, the modes, systems
and levels of logic (in the sense of reasoning) are not immediately reducible to one
system of coherent principles. Rather, these different modes of reasoning are
actively synthesised in action, into a complete building. Buildings are more than just
an art form or tool for living in. According to Møystad (2017), buildings and the built
environment they constitute represent a basic expression of human cognition.
Buildings are shaped by, and in return shape, most aspects of human life, culture,
society and private life. Building is arguably a fundamental mode of thinking itself. It
is only natural that a wealth of logics – all the human skillsets in play (social,
technological, ethical, aesthetic, etc.) – go into the intentional construction of
buildings, particularly on the industrial scale. When seen from an epistemological
perspective, the construction of our shared built environment is hardly supposed to
be reducible to one mode of arguing, proving or reasoning. It should retain some
beneficial tension between interest and priority, since not all aspects of how building
matters can easily be rationalised, as we are also part of greater natural systems of
life, being and thinking.
There are several obvious examples of systems of reasoning in the AEC industry,
whether they are regarded as professions or competencies or even knowledge
fields. What is clear is that they do not always pull in the same direction, reach the
same conclusions or use the same form of argument and evidence beyond merely
different professional languages. There are systematic differences in the ways in
which many of the key agencies – such as architects, engineers, craftsmen,
economists and legal professionals – reason about buildings; about what goes into
them, how they should be made, what matters about them, and how to measure it.
36
What is important is to note that none of them could do without the others. None of
the key agencies holds all the insights necessary to successfully compete a
contemporary building. This dynamic between agencies and competencies can also
be found in building codes: social, technical and aesthetic matters are regulated,
though not equally so, side by side (Skatland et al., 2018).
Another less obvious example on the level of systems where this tension between
systems of logic play out is between planning and doing. Between getting things
done and documentation of what is being done, by whom, and when. This is the
archetypical conflict between blue-collar and white-collar workers (class struggle),
engineers and construction worker; between information management and the skill
of assembling a building. In the AEC industry this tension is very real and represents
a practical manifestation of the tension between a self-grown naturalistic system of
doing and imposed systems of control. Construction work is often self-organising due
to the practical constraints involved in getting things done. Some things are easier to
solve on the spot than to plan them out in detail. Project management, particularly in
matters of compliance and quality control, sometimes becomes an outside logic
projected upon a naturally occurring one. If not kept in check, compliance and control
can easily undermine many of the nuances and sophistication of practical work.
When progress is measured only in hourly output, such as metres of pipe per hour,
the individual craftsman, who often is a capable and creative problem-solver, is
reduced to an assembly line worker.
2.1.4 Acknowledging the problematic limits of knowledge: a consequence of
acknowledging the epistemic heterogeneity of the AEC industry
Acknowledging epistemic heterogeneity as a fundamental characteristic of, and
thereby a practical constraint on, describing knowledge in the AEC industry comes
with a peculiar set of challenges. There are certain vague aspects of the AEC
industry, which I will attempt to exemplify in the following sections, that naturally
resist traditional theoretical conceptualisation. These, however, cannot be abstracted
away without leaving us with a mere idealisation of the theoretical challenges in
developing an epistemological description of the AEC industry. These aspects of
industry behaviour make a difference to interaction in the industry and therefore
potentially to knowledge integration. They are somehow common denominators in
which any common knowledge potentially would be entangled at some level.
I do not suggest that this work will solve any of these vaguer phenomena
circumscribing the typical knowledge process in the AEC industry. Any attempt at
formalising industry knowledge, however, needs to at least account for the aspects
of the industry that resist description either because they are theoretically
ambiguous, unethical, undefinable or unknown (outside the empirical horizon and the
data) or because they represent deeply tribal systems of meaning that emerge inside
the culture of a specific project organisation or industry. They might be part of power
structures or of private, specialised or tribal languages, or simply be so specific to
industry behaviour that no one has bothered to develop a proper (theoretical)
vocabulary to deal with them as part of an epistemic phenomenon with respect to
their epistemic significance (regardless of whether they are productive, distortive or
just plain ignorant).
37
2.1.4.1 The difference between knowing that and knowing how
A great deal of the knowledge in the AEC industry consists of skill – or know-how –
that is not easily formulated into true or false statements typically associated with at
least analytical philosophy. The real trouble is that both forms of knowledge are
important and are part of the contemporary building process, especially with the
increasing demands for documentation and compliance. Finding a conceptual
balance that can address both is a challenge that must be accounted for and
resolved, either theoretically or methodically, when working with industry data as a
basis for knowledge analysis.
2.1.4.2 Truth, lies and whatever works
With reference to the philosophical notion of knowledge as justified true belief, there
are certain practices that come to shape buildings and interaction which are indeed
part of the subterranean skillset that usually makes a difference in the AEC industry.
Part of the skillset, even if it is a challenge to the philosophical notion of continuity
between knowledge and truth, is that the AEC industry is a field of action determined
not only by truth, but also by lies. Whether active, intentional or just white and
innocent, lies are an important aspect of getting things done. Unethical or not,
sometimes lying is what gets the job done, even if this might be short-term thinking
that one prefers not to ponder over. However, if we intend to paint a naturalist picture
of the knowledge exchange where integration somehow happens, we must at least
in theory be aware that lies are part of this field, and that avoiding or countering lies
may be an important part of industry knowledge, understood as a skill, not justified
true belief, simply because it is ‘part of the game‘ and is done or utilised because it
may work within a limited time frame or perspective.
2.1.4.3 The practical limits of knowing (as an epistemic condition)
The project-based nature of the contemporary AEC industry renders it time-sensitive.
This means that any notion of common or shared knowledge must also be timesensitive, at least nominally. Time appears to be a very practical constraint on or limit
to what is, and can be commonly known or knowable in the typical building project.
Some things are outside the timescales of the industry; they are too costly or too
complicated. The limits of what is knowable represent a very practical entity on the
construction site, in a different way than it is to the philosopher or researcher who,
despite time constraints, still does not need to account for the limit of knowing as a
practical matter. They can explore or challenge it, or even research it. On the
construction site the limits of knowing are always present as a concrete problem that
must be handled because of the potential consequences and downsides. Part of the
process is moving the limits of knowing at the right time, at the right cost and within
the scope of the project organisation and the systems of disseminating knowledge.
The sky is very seldom the limit; the practical limit to knowledge is ever present. The
empirical horizon is a local thing, not a universal problem as in philosophy and
research. Any study of industry knowledge must acknowledge the operational fact
that time appears to be money in any project-based practical pursuit.


2.2.3 Theory of science
Science, or the conduct of inquiry, largely consists of discovery; the generation of
hypotheses and verification, the testing, validation or falsification of these
hypotheses concerning the nature of reality. The element of verification has almost
become univocal with the concept of conducting science. Verification has been
treated with the utmost reverence, almost to the point of religiosity. The element of
discovery, however, has been left in an obscure veil of mystery or banality; how
hypotheses about something outside the intuitive or obvious are generated. Scientific
discovery can hardly be a matter of pure luck, genius or utility, but rather comprised
of a way of seeing, a tacit or intuitive way of making observations and adding to
them; what is missing, in order to later test, experiment and validate. The natural
mode of discovery might be informal or intuitive, meaning that it is embedded in the
observer’s way of seeing the world, their prediction model (Friston et al., 2016), what
they add to the world with their mind, in a Kantian sense (transcendental categories)
or perhaps Quinian sense, as a web of beliefs (Quine & Ullian, 1978). This, however,
does not dictate that discovery cannot be formalised into methods or more explicit
logics and ways of seeing beyond guesswork and improvement, but rather into
methods of seeing and finding of rigour, independence and integrity.
2.2.3.1 Reconstructing a logic-in-use
This chapter aims to clarify the science of reconstruction, which is the research
mode underpinning this work. Reconstruction, in the sense we use it here, is the
development of a methodology in the strict sense. Kaplan (1998, pp. 18–27).
Kaplan’s action-philosophical notion of methodology rests on the conceptual
distinction between a logic-in-use and a reconstructed logic. The aim of methodology
is the formalisation of a non-explicit but working logic-in-use into a formalised,
explicit reconstructed logic which is its end product, or expression (how a
methodology is expressed).
If the AEC industry can be imagined as a field of practical thought with its own
distinct cognitive style (Kaplan, 1998, p. 8), distinct from instance fields such as
agriculture, mining, shipping and finance, then the industry’s logic-in-use would, at
any given point in time, be the entire set of qualifying actions and operations
(adverbial aspects) that characterise the industry as a knowledge space.
Conceptualised through the phenomenological frame suggested in this research, a
logic-in-use is what characterises the recognised actions within the collective horizon
of action.
Methodology should not be confused with method or technique, as these are part of
the logic-of-use. According to Kaplan, methodology is the process of reconstructing a
present logic-in-use. It is the process of making a logic-in-use explicit as opposed to
applying and developing a characteristic cognitive style of discipline. In this research,
we suggest adopting Kaplan’s distinction, understanding a reconstructed logic, in
contrast to a logic-in-use, as the formalisation (e.g., the analysis, structuring and
explanation) of a currently applied set of operations that characterise a specific
practice or knowledge space.
56
It is also important to note Kaplan’s emphasis that a reconstructed logic is not merely
a description of behaviour, but also an idealisation of what would in this case be, in
its purest sense, what the industry would be doing if it only did productive things
(acting economically), which would be the goal of creating value regardless of its
definition (negative or positive). It is also important to keep in mind that a
reconstructed logic can in itself, even if an idealisation, be preceded by a superior
logic-in-use. Logic in itself is not superior to action, and this is also an important
premise for this research so as not to assume a polemic perspective on the industry
conduct we analyse.
At present there appears to be no attempts to formulate a comprehensive
methodology of the AEC industry. Seen from a behavioural science perspective, only
isolated (siloed) parts of the industry appear to rest on established scientific grounds,
and then only in relation to its own self-referential practices. The state of knowledge
in the industry seen as one phenomenon appears to be in a pre-scientific state; even
if knowledge is integrated daily on construction sites as buildings materialise, the
principles of this integration process appear to be little understood. Basically, we are
standing opposed to a process that is clearly happening; the logic-of-use is there
(the proof is in the building), but it is not explicit, and the many operations at play are
not well understood in relation to each other.
2.2.3.2 Abduction as the primary form of inference
The primary form of inference of reconstruction is abduction, or pragmatic hypothesis
formulation or generation. In this research we choose to look beyond the actual
development of industry practice, which is developed tacitly and as a specialised
topic within management and architectural theory. In contrast to these theoretical
efforts and the tacit development of practice, this research aims to be analytical and
empirical, our explicit goal being the reconstruction of the current working principles
(logic-in-use) of practice. These reconstructions (logic) cannot be found as
descriptions in practice; rather, they take analytical effort and the formulation of
possible abductions or pragmatic hypotheses from analysis and remodelling of
practice. The aim of this research is, therefore, primarily hypothesis formulation
concerning the nature of the connection (or principles or unity) between several
interconnected actions or pieces of building information, and not the description and
verification of industry practices as they are superficially found among anecdotes
from the industry nor even formalised management and enterprise models.
Reconstruction is not about measuring or verifying the truth of practice. Simply put,
the structure of reconstruction as abductive research into behaviour or practice
consists of:
1. looking for (potential) patterns that connect actions by modelling similarities
and differences in how actions are done or how information is qualified; then
2. formulating a ‘what if ‘, basically adding a principle that would connect these
actions (an expression of a prediction), then
3. proceeding as if this principle was indeed the case, and deriving what the
future consequences would be if one acted accordingly, which would provide
a context for
57
4. verifying the abduction, meaning that if practical consequences can be
conceived (of the added principle), the abduction would be verifiable,
meaning essentially that is was a scientific construct; then finally
5. actual verification, which would, in contrast to classical empirical
demarcation criteria, not be to aim to falsify this hypothesis (Popper, 1959)
or explain it coherently or causally within a paradigm (Kuhn, 2012) or a
research project (Lakatos, 1978), but rather to see it if indeed worked in
practice (had the desired effect).
The classical, and sometimes ridiculed, pragmatic notion of truth as it relates to
action is more closely related to utility than to metaphysical certainty, which fits with
both the AEC industry purpose and the contemporary notion of action inference
(Friston, 2010), or the subjective (or collective) sampling of self-evidence, as a
driving factor in learning, survival and productive behaviours alike. The scientific
demarcation criteria for validating an abduction is indeed whether applying the found
principle in practice would lead to desired effects in the practical field, e.g., the
building process.
Abduction differs from deduction in that its principles are not assumed to be true, and
the inference does not necessarily lead to true consequences, only applicable ones
(and, importantly, testable ones). Abduction differs radically from induction too, as
the goal is not to infer a general principle based on a limited observation or even a
statistically significant basis. Rather, with an abduction one aims to complete an
explanation of an observation with a principle that later can be tested. Basically, it
does not need to be generalisable; as a causal explanation, abductions only need to
work if applied.
The important thing to note with abduction is that it is an inference from observation
of reality; basically, it depends on active sampling of data from the phenomenon at
hand. Abduction is completing an appearance. When completing an experience,
consciousness of the direction of the inference is important. One wants to start from
an observation and then move to completing this observation to make sense. In this
way, it is in principle possible to trace the inference back to data. The difference
between an abduction and a normative sampling of reality (seeing what supports
one’s hypothesis) is subtle, but it exists nonetheless. Cognitively, abductions
proceed from observation to observation to add conceptual content. Normative
observation goes from a held belief (conscious or unconscious) to selective
observation and completion of the totality of the phenomenon within the constraints
of the normative position. Both cognitive operations are active. They both interact
with the observer’s environment. Only the integrity of the researcher can distinguish
these two. Along with the transparency and procedure dealing with the empirical
data, abductions are based on or made to unify. Abductions are about unifying
analytically distributed data into new synthetic principles.
2.2.3.3 As a mode of inference, an abduction always stands within a framework of
understanding
Understanding should in this context be seen in contrast to explanation, which has to
do with causal or perceived causal relations, in accordance with von Wright (1971).
Whereas explanation is used in the natural sciences, understanding is a feature of
58
the behavioural, social and human sciences, especially pertaining to human action.
With improvements in the understanding, one comes to see new connections and
dynamics between existing scopes, problems and methods that characterise human
behaviour. Understanding is always concerned with the (created) patterns in human
conduct, and is therefore always self-reflective as opposed to causal, as pointed out
by Vico (1744) already in the 18th century and which seems to be affirmed by
findings in contemporary neuroscience (Friston, 2010). What understanding provides
is hardly direct solutions, but rather freedom (Kaplan, 1998, p. 24). Freedom in how
one understands, frames and learns in order to implicitly become more capable in
applying a relevant logic-in-use. Abraham Kaplan (1998, p. 24), drawing on Max
Weber’s concept of methodology, likens the understanding, much in accordance with
von Wright, to the freedom which aesthetics provides the practising artist. It is not a
tool he uses to craft his artwork, yet it enriches his world and his work alike. It is an
expansion of his field, a sophistication of his vision and his audience’s vision.
Aesthetics represents greater opportunities for interpretation of his work and its
context. It is a refinement of vision; like ornithology to the birds, a reconstructed logic
is only helpful by implication. It provides the other, such as the birdwatcher – the
potential preservationist – with a framework for understanding the bird’s behaviour in
its natural element. It hardly aims to be helpful by teaching the bird new methods for
being a better, more efficient bird, nor by making material improvements of its
habitat, such as building birdhouses and fountains. The latter would at best be a
strategic anthropomorphising of the bird’s life, and thus a projection of the bird
watcher’s self on the bird, and this is the antithesis of understanding.
In this dissertation, understanding is not strictly limited to the humanist selfunderstanding of human activity introduced by Vico (1744), since the abduction is
dependent not on a philosophical argument but rather on a form of inference that is
testable as heuristics applied in practice. Here we also see a distinct difference
between how hypotheses pertaining to explanation and abduction in a given
framework of understanding (for instance a phenomenological framework) are
testable. Abductions must be tested as principles in practice; explanations find their
verification in controlled experiments (as repeatable) or remain unfalsified in context
of observation, depending on technique and measurements.
2.2.3.4 Aspects of science: discovery versus verification
In principle, science consists of two primary aspects: inquiry, or discovery, and
verification. Inquiry or discovery consist of the generation of hypotheses or
abductions in a framework of either explanation or understanding. Verification, which
for some reason has become the pre-eminent image of scientific activity, is
concerned with verification or falsification. Science as a whole always consists of
both aspects, even if verification (and its criteria and techniques) remains the most
discussed. At a minimum, any scientific activity must fulfil the criterion of not blocking
the road of inquiry, meaning disallowing new explanations or understandings to be
found. Inquiry is often clouded by mystery, as if the generation of hypotheses is a
coincidental process or as if it is driven by magic or the intuition or great geniuses.
Reconstruction has to do with finding, discovering and formulating abductive
hypotheses; it is about increasing our understanding of a phenomenon, meaning
generating more possible explanations and more relevant questions about the nature
and dynamics of that phenomenon. It is only after completing the data with an
59
abduction that reconstructs a principle and then proceeds to act as if this principle
were true that one can test and verify whether this a potential affinity with an existing
statistical distribution or empirical law of behaviour or an isolated heuristic or rule of
thumb. Doing a reconstruction is the activity of searching though and synthesising a
possible principle. It is the finding of principles through completing one’s
observations of data, typically through modelling or through any other analytical
means of discovering patterns of similarities or differences in data that can be
synthesised into a principal formulation. Only after making such a discovery in one’s
data can one then move on to testing, refining (q-learning) and, finally, application.
The meaning of reconstruction is therefore discovery, or generating pragmatic
abduction (the synthetic completion of data or observation); it is not a verification of
data in the most anal sense of scrutinising their reliability and validity as
representation (coherence or correspondence) with reality. It is a unique analytic and
synthetic activity which in turn does not need to be true to be scientific, but which
must be falsifiable so as not to short circuit the scientific feedback loop. An abduction
pertaining to a logic-in-use from a given practice or frame of behaviour, given that it
is formulated as a reconstructed logic, will always be falsifiable because if the
principle synthesised does not have any conceivable effect in practice, it would not
be an abduction in the first place; rather, it would be a descriptive hypothesis or a
description of a unique, empirically documented happening or fact.
In future research, after this reconstruction research has generated some empirically
grounded abductions of principles of knowledge integration in the AEC industry, we
may venture into verification of this new understanding. The components or
contributions towards a reconstructed logic of knowledge integration as it developed
through this research are not generalisations; rather, they are starting points (what
ifs) for a Bayesian sequence of predictions (Friston, 2010) found in adverbial
characteristics of action or information that must be developed into expressions that
will have consequences in practice, where they can be fulfilled in a continued
learning process: If they do what we expect want (or at least do not prevent) the
most action-economical knowledge integration while applied, working basically as
knowledge in the Jamesian sense, we might proceed. We will then know that we
have found both a prediction (a formalised logic or adverbial characteristic) and an
expression that operationalises this prediction for reapplication into practice. If the
application of the principle fails, either we have failed at the expression (reapplying it
back into practice) or the prediction or abduction is indeed wrong and can be
discarded (after further expressions are tried).
In summary, as a pragmatic reconstruction, this research must be read as a work of
scientific discovery and rather different from empirical efforts of verification. Even if
the aim of this inquiry is to provide concrete answers to a set of specific problems
observed in the phenomenon, e.g., some principles of knowledge integration in the
AEC industry, the adverbial characteristics (the principles of this research
reconstructed) are that of generation, meaning that this is expansive research. The
aim is not to provide the one true answer, but rather the scientific demarcation
criteria relevant to this work is to generate more interpretation in the form of more
hypotheses or abductions; in sum, more understanding of something that is already
happening – the industrial-scale production of buildings – which appears not to be
well understood.
60
2.3 Classification
2.3.1 Situating the vocabulary
This section aims to situate the theoretical vocabulary within applied philosophical
pragmatism. The logic of inquiry described in the previous section rests on, if not a
radical naturalism, then at least a methodical outlook on the AEC industry as a
knowledge phenomenon, as an ecological system, meaning something that is to be
understood through the relation of its parts as distinct from a synthetic whole, and
that this can be studied through the data it produces, depending on how we go about
circumscribing, constraining and analysing these data.
Sometimes it is hard to classify one’s work, particularly when it is arrived at through
an experimental trial and error process. The theoretical vocabulary presented in the
logic of inquiry is synthetic by nature, but nevertheless is naturally built upon the
philosophical work of many others. The aim here is to show that this theoretical work
corresponds in some of its principles to a naturalised epistemology, in the Quinian
sense (Rysiew, 2020) of being built on empirical data as distinct from purely a priori
reasoning. It seems to resonate with ecological and systematic approaches to
epistemology (Carvalho, 2016), particularly that of Bateson (2000), which is also an
explicit reference.
In its most basic sense, the vocabulary presented in this chapter can be seen as a
set of strategies of cognitive management. This is a concept borrowed from what
Jerry Fodor sees as a distinctive difference between observation and
experimentation (1991) in describing empirical science. These cognitive strategies
enable us to describe a naturally occurring (practical) knowledge phenomenon, even
if it is not directly accessible on the operative level. Towards fragmentation and
increased professional specialisation. Without such analysis and cognitive
management of one’s observation, it would be hard to observe the contemporary
AEC industry as a unified knowledge phenomenon, particularly empirically in its
operative manifestation (as is the aim of this research).
To some degree, I rely on a somewhat naturalistic outlook on human activity in this
research, meaning that I approach the building industry as if it were a piece of
nature, not merely a social construct; merely a matter of interpretations. By this
naturalism I merely assume that there are discoverable, useful or at least
compressible and generalisable features of human behaviour, activity and thinking
that lend themselves to (admittingly fallible and gradual) inquiry, observation,
hypothesis formalisation and, finally, verification
Even if the work is not directly based on Nicholas Reschner’s methodological
pragmatism (1977), as it is more a result of working towards getting a handle on the
phenomenon rather than starting out from (and defending) a hard-line philosophical
position, the notion of a methodological pragmatism somewhat fits the bill when
classifying the character of my theoretical vocabulary.
The pragmatism of this research is methodical in the sense that it acknowledges the
feedback structure that exists between a theoretical vocabulary meant to produce
61
hypotheses about a non-salient or implied phenomenon, such as know-how in a
heterogeneous project-based industry and the observations such a vocabulary
produces. The point here is not whether one starts with observation or theory or finds
the Archimedean point or lever, to paraphrase Møystad’s critique of Christian
Norberg-Schulz’ theory of place as a starting point for talking about architectural
meaning (2012). The point is whether the suggested vocabulary helps us to get the
data talking on the right subject, producing new and useful or interesting insights.
The primary purpose of the theoretical vocabulary has been to enable some tenable
hypothesis that can be used to start the process of formalisation of knowledge in the
AEC industry with at least some form of transparency and replicability. Significant
efforts have been laid down to maintain the integrity of the phenomenon and to not
diagnose the contemporary AEC industry as intrinsically flawed from an
epistemological perspective. This work is also methodical and pragmatic in the
sense that it does not necessarily postulate any strong metaphysical claims, beyond
the immediate apparent efficacy in studying the phenomenon in this way, and that
doing so maintains the standards of scientific and philosophical integrity.
.
The logic of inquiry is arrived at analytically, based on the pre-defined constraints of
empiricism and acknowledging heterogeneity, with the aim of exploring and enabling
initial access to the phenomenon. The pioneering character of this work lies in the
fact that very little work bridging epistemological analysis of the AEC industry and
future applications could be found to exist. Very little appears to have been done in
terms of developing a robust platform for formalising the knowledge mechanisms of
the AEC industry on empirical grounds. The purpose of the research was never to
adapt the problem of describing or formalising knowledge in the AEC industry to
pragmatism, but in hindsight and after much trial and error, showing how this
platform fits with applied philosophical pragmatism seems to fit. The truth, as always,
lies somewhere in the middle. The most important motivation for adding this section
as a reflection upon the character of the vocabulary is that it is important to
acknowledge explicit and implicit pragmatism (the intellectual heritage, the shoulders
upon which this work rests).
In the following I will proceed to discuss the fit between the platform arrived at and
applied philosophical pragmatism. In essence, it is a very basic review of the toolbox
of philosophical pragmatism as it relates to my way of handling the problem of
formalising AEC industry knowledge.
2.3.2 A pragmatist logic of inquiry
2.3.2.1 The pragmatic attitude towards phenomena, meaning and information
Philosophical pragmatism provides an intellectual platform for reconstructing tacit
knowledge mechanisms: Particularly the intellectual frameworks of C S Peirce, but
also, to a lesser degree, of William James, John Dewey and later George Santayana
and Hillary Putnam, Gregory Bateson and Abraham Kaplan. Compared to the
analytic tradition that often favours the justified-true-belief-statement forms of
knowledge analysis, pragmatism offers particular analytic tools to the study of knowhow by accentuating effects over intentions, form over content, and action in its
relation to thoughts and physical objects.
62
A review of philosophical pragmatism is beyond the scope of this short theory
section. The primary purpose of this section is to acknowledge that both implicit and
explicit pragmatism underpins this theoretical approach to knowledge formalisation.
The current work is primarily a method development. It is about applying insights
from a philosophical platform seldom applied directly on a practical phenomenon.
The main purpose is not a scholarly one, and the treatment of pragmatism might
therefore seem a little light-hearted to seasoned scholars of the matter. The chosen
focus here is on how the pragmatist project fits with the phenomenon (the AEC
industry), topic (knowledge integration) and problem (empirical, heterogeneous and
applied) in question. As mentioned in the previous section, the challenge of
formalising knowledge in the contemporary AEC industry is neither a purely practical
know-how problem nor a purely theoretical one. To produce a transparent, reliable
perspective based on a robust description and hypothesis formulation; a theoretical
base that corresponds to the nature and dynamics of the actual phenomenon must
be made. Observations of knowledge in the AEC industry hardly follow from any preestablished theory or postulations. Rather, a method for observing the knowledge
phenomenon must be built upon a theoretical platform developed to fit the particulars
of the phenomenon and the topic.
The AEC industry is hardly a theoretical phenomenon. Buildings are built in practice,
not merely in theory. As a knowledge phenomenon, the AEC industry depends upon
a subtle (and sometimes not so subtle) interplay between thinking, reflection, acting
and the effects of very physical things. Accordingly, a theoretical platform for
observing and describing such a phenomenon needs to acknowledge this interplay.
Moreover, it needs to keep these cognitive ingredients in play at all the necessary
levels: first, phenomenologically, in how the practical appearances of the AEC
industry are approached, prepared, described and broken down for analysis.
Second, epistemologically, in how knowledge is presumed to be manifest, how it can
be constrained and distinguished from phantoms and mere mirages. Third,
scientifically, as in how the components and operations applied in the study of the
phenomenon affects, circumscribes and maintains the integrity of the phenomenon.
And how the approach upholds the rigours of science, primarily as a work of
discovery and hypothesis generation, not merely as a true or false game of verifying
assumptions that might be held about the nature of knowledge in this industry.
The pragmatic phenomenology applied (in the circumscription of the AEC industry) in
this method development depends upon three main conceptual handles. First, a
stratification of the elements of a phenomenon into mental categories; second, a
theory of meaning; and finally operationalisation into the empirical realm by a
pragmatic information definition.
A fundamental notion of a stratified cognitive phenomenology (Dinesen, 1991)
distinguishing between the mental representation or appearances of qualities,
relations and references or representations lies at the base of everything done in this
research. Assuming the standpoint of human experience has consequences for
analysis. Ironically, Peirce imagined the application of his phenocopy as a purely
formal exercise (La Tienne, 1993, 2004; Atkins, 2013), and presumably never
contemplated that it was in the analysis of the most practical phenomena that the
categorical (cognitive) distinctions were to be most meaningful and useful.
Consequently, he never developed his phenomenology into the powerful information
63
classification system it appears has to have the potential to be, even though his work
has had enormous influence in both information theory and the development of
synthetic programming languages.
Second, an approach to the meaning of appearances conceived through their effects
and not primarily through their content or intentions, nor through their truth value by
any measure. Such an approach to meaning is found at the very base of
philosophical pragmatism. C S Peirce reformulated the pragmatic maxim several
times, originally in the essay ‘How to make our ideas clear‘ (Peirce, 1955).
‘It appears, then, that the rule for attaining the third grade of clearness of
apprehension is as follows: Consider what effects, that might conceivably have
practical bearings, we conceive the object of our conception to have. Then, our
conception of these effects is the whole of our conception of the object.‘
The relevance a study of the AEC industry appears to be straightforward: being a
practical production process, the industry can be conceived and surveyed in terms
what has practical effects within it, meaning it can be meaningfully described through
the effects of its elements on the produced output (and of the process of producing
it). As a knowledge phenomenon, the AEC industry can be conceived to manifest in
terms of effects and how these effects interact and are enabled intentionally or
unintentionally.
Effects can tentatively be grasped in terms of acts; of what an element (object) or
agency do in the system of elements, action and interconnections. Here, acting is not
preconditioned by intentionality (Searle, 2010); rather, it simply denotes any
actualisation of a change, of something that has an effect upon something that
matters within the constraints of the phenomenon. At first this does not necessarily
seem helpful. It basically suggests that the AEC industry is to be understood as a
web of mediated interaction. This is indeed what the actor-network theory approach
would be doing (Latour, 2005; Fallan, 2008). It would simply (but not easily) start
retracing and describing every interaction that lies behind any specific element or
event at any given time. Naturalistic as this may be, it is not particularity suited to
(the study of or search for) a (common) epistemological topic or theme or platform
that requires deeper analysis of commonalities in the ‘how’ component of interaction
in a system, such as a formalisation of epistemic principles of integration. Such an
approach would benefit from a more formalised or compressed circumscription of
effects so that they may be analysed, compared and distinguished. Epistemic
analysis somehow demands a (common) unit of analysis; any happening or event or
interaction will not do, especially if the study aims to transcend the individual case
and be formulated into a scientifically and practically replicable method.
For the purpose of this study, which aims for an empirical analysis of a system of
effects, it appeared useful to formulate or operationalise the pragmatic theory of
meaning (the maxim) into a pragmatic information definition. Such a definition is
found in the work of William James but also more famously in Gregory Bateson’s
cybernetic postulation that information is a difference that makes a difference (in a
given system of meaning or effects) (Bateson, 2000). If pragmatic meaning is felt or
conceived through its effects, pragmatically conceived information is distinguished by
making a (actual, practical) difference to whatever system it informs. In this study,
64
information is a matter of differences, not merely about its message and
distinguishing this from the noise that unavoidably is observed or found within. Broad
and general as this may seem, the pragmatic Batesonian understanding of
information in a system is nevertheless both a compression and an expansion of
classical information theory (Shannon and Weaver), the main use of which lies in
describing communication. Building a building is hardly just a matter of
communicating the right content to the right receiver with as little noise distortion as
possible, because much of it, not to say its essence, involves producing an actual
effect, that is, in order to become physical (e.g., a building component), the factuality
of actually producing an effect in the building process is actually more important than
(or just as significant as) the message of any piece of information, regardless of its
form or modality. AEC industry building information must have an effect on the
building or on the process of getting it built. To actually represent the meaning of
interaction in the AEC industry, information needs to be understood both in terms of
having an effect, but also in terms of how it affects, or how information indeed
informs (how it enables its effects).
By insisting upon an information definition that theoretically involves a ‘how’ aspect,
one builds a connection point between pragmatic phenomenology (containing
analytic classes that distinguish and relate objects, acts and thoughts), a theory of
meaning (effects) and, as we shall see, a theory of knowledge that operationalises
know-how as a serious epistemic entity. If all information can be conceived to come
with a ‘how’ aspect, the knowledge aspect of information can be conceived in terms
of this ‘how’ as the know-how of or within information; how the difference the
information represents in the system that is the building process is practically
enabled in a heterogeneous, multidisciplinary environment.
Practically and methodically, these three theoretical elements (of this pragmatic
phenomenology) operationalise an analytical, taxonomy of information (classification
system) that theoretically opens industry information to epistemological analysis
while maintaining the critical integrity or interplay between actions, thoughts and
objects that characterise the pillars of the naturalised knowledge system without
reducing one to the other.
In the next section we see how pragmatic epistemology fits with the AEC industry
phenomenon and its empirical manifestation in information that was just conceptually
outlined. Universal information recognisability as a discoverable ‘how’ aspect of
information theoretically precedes knowledge integration across different agencies in
the building project. This adverbial characteristic might therefore be a possible
compression point in the project information structure (in the sense of Schmidthuber
(2010)). Given that the AEC industry is multidisciplinary though not necessarily
collaborative, information recognisability should be studied as a potential epistemic
compressor.
2.3.2.2 Applied pragmatist epistemology: operationalisation and the study of
enabling aspects of action (know-how)
William James’ famous dictum ‘the truth is what works‘ (Cormier, 2000) is often
criticised and ridiculed as superficial and instrumental by thinkers, including
prominent pragmatists such as Peirce himself. When integrated with a pragmatic
65
information definition, however, such a concept of truth – or better – facts as they
pertain to knowledge, takes on a new level of operative sophistication, especially
when the intended application is analysing a phenomenon constituted by active
inferences that change the facts or that change reality by evolving Umwelt (Møystad,
2017). James’ notion might fall short when analysing theoretical statements but
works amazingly well when studying the epistemic (enabling) aspect of information,
looking for compressibility (Schmidhuber, 2010), since compressibility of information
is sensitive to the phenomenological classes to which the information belongs: how
something works.
Pragmatic epistemology provides a conceptual platform for the study of practical
enabling; of how something is made possible. (Kaplan, 1998). This is achieved
through accentuating form as well as content in the study of knowledge, as it
manifests in effects; not what they say or what they are, but how they say it, how
they are facts. Practically speaking, this conceptualisation of knowledge deals with
the enabling aspect of whatever the facts have to do with know-how, in the art and
science of making – constructing – buildings and built environments. The AEC
industry is not just a fact or full of facts; it produces new matter-of-fact buildings that
have direct effects on humans, our behaviour and on our thinking.
In the pragmatic realm, in which the AEC industry is located, knowledge cannot be
conceived as a thing in itself, such as an ideal or the Truth (with a capital T). Rather,
knowledge manifests here as the quality of any given action in this sequence. The
concept of quality here is not understood in its laudatory sense or as the fulfilment of
any predicate (other than developing any form and actualisation of the aim). The
AEC industry consists of productive activity as opposed to being a purely reflective
pursuit. In such contexts, knowledge, in the pragmatic sense, can be understood as
the adverbial quality of an action (Kaplan, 1998, pp. 42–43); how something is being
done. In the specific context of the building industry, this adverbial quality
fundamentally consists of informing the shape and content of a building project as
well as enabling the realisation of such shape and content.
In the AEC industry, knowledge as an adverbial quality manifests in at least two
discoverable ways: directly, as some adverbial quality of the actors’ productive
behaviour towards their aim, and indirectly, as the adverbial qualities of the
communicative formalisation of these acts as explicit information; information which
in this circumstance reads in its broad cognitive sense as ‘a difference that makes a
difference‘ (Bateson, 2000) to the form, content or pragmatic realisation of a building.
Basically, information in this broad, general sense can always be traced back to at
least one of the participating human agencies of the building process and thus,
naturalistically, is the particularisation of what informs the building.
Although the various actors’ behaviour might very well be the most direct
manifestation of a building process’ collective (knowledge base) horizon of action,
the inherent communicative intentionality of building information makes this a
preferable source or data point or access channel for an empirical inquiry into
knowledge integration in practice. Information contains a representation of
knowledge in action that is meant to be understood. The information produced by the
actors during the process might very well be best chance of discovering a positive
manifestation of a collective (knowledge base) horizon of action or common
66
denominator of knowledge enabling integration through mutual information
recognition. Comparable studies of behaviour across differences in aims, stakes and
educational background are bound to be ridden by almost insurmountable contextual
(hermeneutical) and interpretational problems, especially, since the author would
unavoidably be biased or sympathetic towards the architect’s perspective through
sharing this background. Explicit information (something stated that intends to
inform) holds a distinct empirical advantage over behaviour as input channel to an
inquiry into the nature of knowledge integration in practice. Information is
intentionally meant to be understood and therefore contain at least the seed of
epistemic unity compared to behaviour, which can be entirely, though perhaps
unintendedly, antagonistic to other behaviour.
Like many other contemporary societal processes, the AEC industry is becoming an
information-dense activity. A secondary but considerably practical consideration of
why the study of information rather than behaviour is suggested here is that the
building industry is increasingly better documented, both formally and informally.
Consequently, there should be ample material available for inquiry, either as primary
sources or as secondary reference points for re-evaluation and triangulation of the
data obtained by interviews and similar recollective techniques. Behaviour captured
in an analysable form, would imply a preliminary interpretation and reshaping, and
would by comparison already in the data capture stage represent a less reliable,
redoable (replicable) raw source of knowledge integration.
Third, and finally, any inherent vagueness and miscommunication between the
industry actors should not be defined away from the framework of empirical study.
Rather, the problem of vagueness should be incorporated as an implicit problem of
knowledge integration in the pragmatic realm. Anecdotally, anybody with any time
spent in the construction business knows that misunderstandings are an important
practical challenge and possibly a defining aspect of industry interaction. Even
though it would be easier to conceptualise the positive, defining quality of the
collective horizon of action as a binary feature – e.g., either information has this
quality or it has not – the very concept of knowledge as an adverbial quality of action
does not logically permit such finitude or absoluteness. Rather, the defining,
structural quality of a collective horizon of action might just as well exist as a matter
of degree, allowing weaker recognition within the action sequence just as well as
stronger, more definite recognition. This possibility cannot be abstracted out of the
study since it might be critical to the actual dynamic of the phenomenon critical to
understanding how knowledge affects the aim of the action sequence that is the
construction industry pragmatic. We must allow for degrees of integration. Behaviour
seldom has a binary interpretation; it is rarely a matter of either or. In this study, the
same is true for information. Building information should not be understood as
absolute binary representations of the process of making a building. There is
vagueness and contextual interpretation at play. This vagueness and context is part
of the epistemological landscape of any collective effort.
2.3.2.3 Inquiry and discovery in the pragmatist theory of science
2.3.2.3.1 On the conceptual and methodical fit between the logic of inquiry and
pragmatic theory of science
67
Pragmatist theory of science provides a platform for tackling some key challenges to
formalising practical know-how, such as in the AEC industry. First, studying an
action-dependent knowledge phenomenon requires an outlook on science in general
that acknowledges action dependence or active inference (Friston, 2010).
Pragmatism offers such an outlook. Not only methodically, but in its core principles
and demarcation criteria for science. Second, the pragmatic platform offers an
articulation of the challenging interface between logic and empirical reality
(formalised and practical knowledge systems). Handling this interface remains
critical for the entire plausibility and value of this research project. Third, classic
Peircean pragmatism provides us with a form of inference that allows us to deal with
discovery in a methodical and logical manner: abduction. The relationship between
abduction and other forms of inference can also be systematised on an actiontheoretical platform of science. Dealing with discovery in a logical manner, as
opposed to luck and genius, remains critical if any formalisation of AEC industry
knowledge is to be conducted intentionally or is to serve as ?a robust empirical
platform of industry data.
2.3.2.3.2 Science as inquiry: a mode of conduct in itself
In the essay ‘How to make our thoughts clear‘, Peirce himself stresses the
importance of acknowledging the perspective from which thinking happens: that of
human consciousness. From the pragmatist point of view, that is also true for
science. Any scientific pursuit happens from the perspective of human interest,
thinking and consciousness. As such, it depends on the both the finitude (limits),
fallibility and action dependency of the human perspective. Thinking is not limited to
observing this world; it involves acting. It is an activity. And such is also science.
Pragmatically speaking, science in practice is hardly just an ideal form of thinking; it
is a form of human conduct characterised by the human condition.
2.3.2.3.3 The pragmatic definition of science: an action-dependent process towards
the truth
Both in Peirce (1955) and in Dewey (1938) we find articulations of epistemology and
science that accentuate the self-improving process over any final truth or ideal.
Dewey was reluctant to associate his philosophical work on knowledge and learning
with epistemology. He preferred the concept of inquiry – or continuous self-improving
search and development of knowledge and know-how – in any field of human
endeavour. Like Peirce, he held that the aim of inquiry, particularly scientific inquiry,
was to reach the opinion (remembering the human standpoint) which ultimately
everybody would agree upon, given that it has been openly submitted to testing by
an inquiring community for as long as needed to stabilise as real in terms of effects
in the real world. Fundamentally, to the pragmatist, science is a process or mode of
behaviour that is characterised by acknowledging fallibility, maintaining openness
(‘not block the roads of inquiry‘ (Peirce, 1955)) and embracing self-correction over
time. Acknowledging fallibility and openness at the core of scientific behaviour
means that scientific activity hardly is validated by following certain pre-determined
rules, even if these have proven to work before, since the integrity of the inquiry is
not primarily a matter of coherent logic. Rather, it is the effects of new insights into
human knowledge in general and into the self-correction and expansion of scientific
inquiry itself that matter, regardless of the method by which new insights are
68
acquired. A scientific community is not a normative entity; it is a practical one,
collectively moving towards truth by self-correction, trial and error. Theoretically, this
community moves towards agreement over (infinite) time. Practically, this community
might behave politically, exhibiting control and sensor on method and technique. But
theoretically, science cannot be defined by politics nor by the ‘method of authority‘
(Peirce, 1955), even if it has been described in such terms in illuminating studies by
Kuhn (2012), Lakatos (1978) and others. Rather, as both expansive and selfcorrecting, science is defined by its purpose and not by its means.
The purpose of inquiry encompasses all possible kinds of truths, discovered,
formalised and validated by any method as long as they bear effects in human reality
and remain open to scrutiny in terms of transparency, replicability and accessibility.
2.3.2.3.4 A theory of science embracing the entire picture of inquiry
From a pragmatic, even naturalistic, standpoint, to encompass all possible truths,
scientific inquiry cannot be exclusively goal-driven or objective oriented, even those
branches that rely heavily on measuring, verification and quantification. If scientific
inquiry is to remain both expansive (able to encompass all potential truths) and selfcorrecting over time, it cannot exclusively depend on objectives received by other
modes of human interest such as societal utility or the validation of practices or
means commissioned by political or commercial life. To maintain integrity as an
inquiry, science logically and practically consists of both validation (self-correction)
and discovery (expansion). The traditional, naïve or populist view of science as the
purely rigorous validation or Popperian invalidation of hypotheses lacks a critical
piece of any self-sustaining inquiry: a methodical and logical outlook on hypothesis
generation or on how to make discoveries and how to formalise the practice of
discovery into a logical framework.
The most fundamental consequence of assuming a pragmatic stance of science as
inquiry appears to be a less normative, broader and more inclusive stance on what
characterises the scientific process. In Kaplan (1998), this broader perspective,
accentuating both validation and discovery, has been articulated in a theory of
science platform for the behavioural sciences. Studying AEC industry knowledge in
practice closely corresponds to a study of behaviour, which in turn is a mode of
behaviour itself. Kaplan stresses that science in the context of behavioural studies,
and cannot be reduced to a set of predetermined rules. Rather, it comes down to a
purposeful type of behaviour and attitudes; to a mode rather than a code, of conduct.
Any formalisation of science involves a reconstruction of action principles
characterising the particular inquiry. This means that any (formalised) definition of
science is at best a hypothesis or an abduction. It is valid if it provides us with
prediction, compression progress or advantages (wanted consequences) in the
practice it studies. This is also a perspective that we draw on (Kaplan’s perspective)
in the efforts to formalise the AEC industry, generating methods of discovery and
hypothesis generation.
In summary, understanding science as a self-correcting, expansive inquiry of human
knowledge includes a broad range of techniques and cognitive styles within the
frame. Pragmatic science is characteristically heterogenous in its methods but
69
unified by purpose, and at the very minimum it logically involves both discovery and
validation.
2.3.2.3.5 The pragmatic demarcation criteria of science: avoid blocking inquiry
Even if a pragmatic theory of science fundamentally remains multidisciplinary and
methodically inclusive, it is hardly without demarcation criteria. In many ways, the
pragmatic way of circumscribing science remains harsher and more intellectually
demanding than a conservative idealisation of methodology as the stronghold or
science (in, for instance, Laudan’s (1990) refutation of Quine). Fundamentally,
pragmatism only works if taken with the relentless demand for self-correction. In the
classic texts, the key demarcation criteria of science are formulated negatively.
Neither Peirce, Dewey nor Kaplan prescribe a particular scientific conduct. Rather,
they stress the imperative of not standing in the way of inquiry. Inquiry must remain
open, and efforts to close down certain avenues, whether by topic or method or by
normative or political means, are fundamentally unscientific. Over time, it is assumed
that any wrongheaded inquiry will come to correct itself since it is bound to be
unfruitful or bear no practical effects or bearings on the real world.
A tentative positive formulation of the pragmatic demarcation criteria would be as
follows: any inquiry, regardless of method or motivation, that generates either new
(falsifiable or testable) observations, questions or hypotheses, are in practice
scientific. Methodically, this might sound a bit frivolous, as if anything goes if we are
getting somewhere new. But naturalistically speaking, drawing or juxtapositioning
this perspective with the newest insights from empirical neuroscience (Friston &
Frith, 2015) and computer science (Stanley & Lehman, 2015), the positive
formulation of pragmatist science comes to look like a collective process of novelty
search, aiming for the continuous improvement of our collectively held cognitive map
of reality, looking for new ways of seeing, compressing (Schmidhuber, 2010) and
remembering or storing knowledge about reality seen from the action-dependent
human perspective. This emergent view of science as a naturalistic, continuous
inquiry is hardly objective, but rather methodically constrained by progress, geared
towards expansion, improvement and discovery. Constraints are never normative,
but practical. Only what does not work is left behind, though only until it might prove
useful again in the search for the self-correcting, collectively acknowledged truth,
given infinite time and experiments.
Pragmatic theory of science urges us to avoid blocking the road of inquiry. Openness
towards anything that works – as William James has been criticised for claiming –
because only effects matter, becomes the prime virtue of the inquiring mind and
community (civilisation). Science is about opening the road, not closing the gates. It
is about enabling more questions to be posed, more topics to be investigated, more
methods to be tried, and the demarcation criteria for science cannot tell us how to do
this, only what to avoid whatever is stopping it. Pragmatist science is always a
forward movement; even when it returns to previous truths and methods because
some new insights have made them useful again in the greater scope of inquiry.
2.3.2.3.6 The pragmatic attitude towards the relationship between logic and empirical
reality
70
The pragmatic doctrine holds that logic must answer to reality. Any theory or
systematic description of anything that affects the human condition or cognition must
at one point be held empirically responsible. Logic is not superior to reality; it is a
method, or one tool in the toolbox.
Formalising knowledge in the AEC industry concerns establishing a logical
systematisation and description of an action-dependent process in practical reality.
From the pragmatist point of view, this means it will be accounted for in terms of its
internal and external effects and be held empirically responsible in terms of these
effects.
Logic is understood here in its broader sense as a system of rules for reasoning,
evidence and validity. Furthermore, we do not refer to logic only in its most formal,
mathematical sense. Rather, the pragmatist stance assumes that both reality and the
logic that aims to describe it remain action dependent. Either in its assumptions or its
operation, any logic stands in a hypothetical relation to empirical reality. Therefore,
any formalisation of observation of empirical reality must produce hypotheses that
can be tested in terms of their effect in the said empirical reality when acted upon.
The action test, or application test should always follow the formalisation of any logic.
Such a test could be anything from controlling under laboratory conditions to testing
the efficacy of a haggling strategy with a street vendor. Such a test, however, should
not be used to prevent the formalisation of a hypothesis, since this would constitute
blocking the roads of inquiry. A test can also be devised after hypothesis formulation.
Interaction between a system of rules (and particularly when developing a system of
rules) and an action-dependent reality can to some degree be manipulated and
changed, influenced by action, volition, intention or representation: This, however,
seems true of most of the aspects of reality that interest humans. We can indeed
engage with it actively, and if not control it (we never equated action with control),
then at least interact and progress with it to some degree, to produce either external
results such as buildings or insights that have practical advantages for human
survival and thriving.
2.3.2.3.7 Why study of the business of constructing built environments demands a
pragmatic logic
Logic in the context of scientific inquiry seems dependent on premises stated as
hypotheses about the empirical reality. At the same time, logic helps structure the
said reality in order to generate new hypotheses. This is not a mere mirroring (a
matter of empirical correspondence), as the process of formalisation is also
dependent on concepts such as internal coherence, arguments or rules (iteration,
manipulations). Pragmatist logic remains broader than description. Logic also deals
with forms (effects, relations and even consequences), not just content. Logic deals
with systematic relations of why, but also of how when operating in an actiondependent reality; how things effect, how they work, how a system of reasoning
works. In relation to empirical reality, however, it remains critical to note that logic
always remains a hypothesis. It is logic that needs to change if this relation does not
harmonise, even if we sometimes have the power (due to the action dependency of
human reality) to ‘change reality to fit out logics‘ (systems of beliefs and reasoning).
in the short term (paraphrasing Damasio (1994)). The built environment is such an
71
instance. This special position of the built environment as an active exploitation of
the action dependencies of our cognitive interaction with said environments makes
the scientific study of the behaviour of changing our environment a peculiarly
challenging one. It remains something of a reflexive peculiarity from a scientific and
logical standpoint. Here, the pragmatic scientific concepts of constitutional fallibility,
and self-correction over time and of the imperative against blocking the road to
inquiry are more critical than in just about any other phenomena. In the often yearslong project processes that characterise the contemporary AEC industry, it might be
too easy to claim that something works at one particular point in time while not
understanding the true consequences or effects of putting this belief into action later
down the line, in the building process or in the life-span of the building, which more
often than not outlives the arguing, reasoning human being.
2.3.2.3.8 Discovery as a logical part of inquiry: not an isolated miracle
In general, there are multiple forms of inference that play different roles in different
phases of the process of science, discovery and verification, the primary one here
dealing with discovery will be abduction. The scientific purpose of this particular
study is quite specific. Here, our purpose is to generate some hypotheses on the
very nature of knowledge in the AEC industry based on rigorous observation or data
collection. Another way of thinking or understanding this aim is that we actively try to
find order in something that appears chaotic in its broader meaning of both
unpredictable and uncertain.
Figure 2-4. The knowledge curve; a synthesis of Pointcaré’s four phases of
discovery and Peirce’s three forms of inference. Adaptation from (Bologna et al.,
2013), which in turn is an adaptation from (Barile, 2009).
The nature of the research problem of formalising knowledge integration in the AEC
industry, when approached as a methodical, empirical problem, requires abductive
72
inference. This mode of inference, which might be unfamiliar to many even though
we typically perform it in informal ways every day, is characteristic of a pragmatist
approach to science.
One of the key contributions of Peircian philosophy of science and of pragmatism in
general consists is a systematic review of forms of inference, and particularly of
inclusion and articulation of abduction – or action-dependent hypotheses – which are
critical for this enquiry. Operating between the unknown (chaos) and complexity
necessitates abductive inference, meaning basically to produce a (hypothetical)
footing in the phenomenon. In short, the abductive process consists of: 1) observing
an appearance, 2) completing it so as to achieve compression or prediction
(explanation and understanding), and then 3) acting as if it were true, to later test
whether completing said observations as such have any practical bearings,
particularly any wanted effects in reality. If the completion of the appearance works
(in the Jamesian sense), meaning that it has meaningful effects when acted out in
the practical context in which the observation was made, this supports the abduction
as useful in the process of inquiry (towards truth or certainty).
With reference to the knowledge curve (Figure 1), an abduction serves a critical
purpose in the process of discovery and in scientific inquiry in general. It is a logical
mode that enables the generation of hypotheses from observation. Abduction
creates the first footing in the phenomenon to be tested and further developed. It
serves an expansive purpose. By itself, however, it is incomplete. An abduction can
in itself never produce a true conclusion, only a hypothesis. This taken into
consideration, and when comprehended in a pragmatic framework, the abduction is
not only scientific, but also serves the critical purpose of enabling intentional
discovery into the realm of science as opposed to leaving the act of discovery to luck
and magic.

3. METHOD
Operationalising an analytical perspective on AEC industry data
The ambition governing the methodical approach presented in the following has
been to bridge the theoretical vocabulary and empirical, data-driven aspects of the
research carried out. More precisely, it addresses the methodical gap of how making
indirect knowledge content of building industry information salient and open to
analysis.
This is not to say that the path from abstraction to practice was straightforward:
rather, the methodical approach needs to be seen as the reflection of a learning
process on many levels. The end-point of this six-year process was the
generalisation of conceptual insights into a technique or set of rules. This technique
allows processing raw data from the industry into insights concerning the underlying
mechanisms of knowledge interfaces. The formalisation of this process into a
technique can be summarised in an empirical procedure akin to an algorithm.
Given certain limitations, this empirical procedure then extends into a three-level
logic of discovery, linking analysis to potential applications. It is this logic that finally
enables us to generate abductive hypotheses concerning the nature of knowledge
73
integration features of the AEC industry. These abductions are possible explanations
of the patterns we encounter in the results which later may be subjected to
verification or falsification either by expanding the inquiry or through practical testing
back into the industry.
This method chapter contains the following components: first, a description of the
main methodical problem addressed; second, a brief explanation of the research
design chosen; third, a timeline showing the actual process of establishing these
empirical rules, piece by piece, by trial and error; fourth, a formalisation, assembling
and systematising the choices and analytical components into the technique, a set of
analytical rules; fifth, a summary of the technique in terms of a generalised, empirical
procedure, and finally, sixth, the limits of this technique in terms of scope, reliability
and validity are outlined.
3.1 Methodical problem
3.1.1 The indirect nature of knowledge as a methodical problem
The methodical root problem of developing an epistemic perspective on the AEC
industry as a natural knowledge system comes down to its practical and operative
nature, the challenge consists of making the non-salient knowledge aspect of
information salient and open to analysis.
The shared practical knowledge of the AEC industry comes not in the form of
statements, but of adverbial aspects of actions (formalised and documented) and
(building) information. Knowledge in any practical field hardly manifests in the
traditional epistemological statement forms. Rather, it manifests in the quality of
actions. The challenge of addressing such knowledge is that it always remains
indirect. Knowledge, as understood here, it is not a statement or an agreement or
even a skill. Rather, the knowledge must be scrutinised in the way an action is
conducted. More particularly, not just any quality of action, but rather the quality of
action that enables universal recognition, the quality than enables the industry as a
emergent system of knowledge; something common, more than just the sum of the
skills of its participants.
Analytically, based on the above observation of the everyday reality of the building
industry, it appears evident that epistemic unity hardly manifests as a descriptive
agreement upon the nature of knowledge, nor does knowledge integration appear as
an established agreed-upon episteme shared by the actors, like the core of basic
principles shared by a mature science programme. (Lakatos, 1978). However,
acknowledging the AEC industry phenomenologically as a practical endeavour as
opposed to a strictly scientific or purely reflective one opens for another
interpretation of how epistemic unity manifests altogether: rather than manifesting as
pre-established agreement (explicit or implied) on the nature and dynamics of
knowledge, any potential unity between the qualities of action can be established
during the action sequence by (means of) mediation of controversies (Latour, 2005).
Consequently, the potential for any epistemic unity of the industry emerges in action
rather than in description in the pragmatic realm. Apparently, if one is to take the
routine completion of buildings as evidence (regardless of whether these buildings
are good or bad), the actors hardly need to agree on the nature of knowledge as
74
long as they can integrate different adverbial qualities (skills and perspectives) in
action towards the completion of the aim.
It therefore seems reasonable to infer that any epistemological consistency in the
industry, understood in the pragmatic sense, manifests as knowledge integration in
practice. Consequently, instead of a pre-established, descriptive epistemological
agreement, the building industry as a particular knowledge phenomenon appears to
manifest as a collective horizon of action. It hardly operates as a collective horizon of
reflection. As a collective, the building industry acts rather than thinks about what is
being done and how it is being done. This phenomenon may emerge globally, as a
behavioural structure of the AEC industry in general, as well as locally, as a
particular feature of each unique building project organisation. Either way, this
phenomenon can be imagined as the result of collective (collaborative or noncollaborative) action towards the particularisation of some forms and their practical
realisation, as stipulated in our vocabulary. The collective horizon of action of the
typical construction industry process can be defined in at least two ways: negatively
or positively. From what it is not or from what unites it. The negative, which is an
absolute definition, circumscribes this collective horizon as defined by the virtual limit
of what the participants recognise (and act upon) as part of the sequence of actions
towards the aim, as opposed to all the possible acts and happenings that remain
unrecognised and inconsequential to the process. The positive conceptualisation, on
the other hand, demarcates the collective horizon of action as characterised by some
structural feature or quality that enables the acts of (or information produced by) one
actor to be recognised by another, despite the possibility that these two might be
working towards the aim for different reasons and by different means.
The positive definition of the collective horizon of action enables an empirical
approach to the nature of epistemic unity or knowledge integration in practice (in the
AEC industry). This way of approaching structural features of the AEC industry
provides us with a potential handle, something to look for. Furthermore, this positive
starting point can be articulated in a definite empirical research framework, defined
through three distinct abductions (hypotheses). Here, abductions are understood in
the Peircian sense, as the third mode of inference, complimenting deducting and
induction with a generative logical mode of inference. This consists of: a) making an
incomplete observation of a phenomenon, e.g., the AEC industry; b) completing this
observation in a plausible way, e.g., by postulating that knowledge integration
happens in some discoverable way in practice and interaction between the agents;
and c) then act or inquire as if it were true so as to deduce or test its practical
consequences. If the abductive inference takes inquiry to new places, either by
excluding possibilities or discovering usable explanation models relevant to the
phenomenon at hand, it must be regarded as operationally, logically or scientifically
sound, depending on the context of inquiry.
Given this pragmatic framework, and choosing to work with a positive
conceptualisation of the AEC industry as a collective action horizon, the empirical
operationalisation of our research rests abductively on the following three postulates:
I
First, epistemic unity in the AEC industry manifests as knowledge integration in
practice, consisting of some discoverable quality within the constitutive structure of
75
the collective horizon of action of the typical building process. This appears
reasonable given the provisional thesis, its underpinning, the contradicting
observation and its analytical consequences.
II
Second, this discoverable quality manifests in at least two possible ways: directly as
some adverbial quality of the actors’ productive behaviour towards their aim, and
indirectly as the adverbial quality of the communicative formalisation of these acts,
either between themselves or with the outside world, as explicit information;
information, which in this particular circumstance reads in its broader cognitive sense
as ‘a difference that makes a difference‘ (Bateson, 2000) to the form, content or
pragmatic realisation of the end aim, typically the building. Basically, information, in
this broad and general sense, can always be traced back to at least one of the
participating human agencies of the building process and thus, naturalistically, is the
particularisation of what informs the building.
Although the various actors’ behaviour might very well be the most direct
manifestation of a building process’ collective horizon of action, the inherent
communicative intentionality of building information as a representation of
(knowledge in) actions that are meant to be understood makes this a preferable
source, data point or access channel for an empirical inquiry into knowledge
integration. The information produced by the actors during the process might very
well be the best chance of discovering a positive manifestation of a collective horizon
of action. Any comparable study of behaviour across differences in aims, stakes and
educational background is bound to be ridden by almost insurmountable contextual
(hermeneutical) and interpretational problems. Explicit information, something stated
and particular that intends to inform, holds the distinct empirical advantage over
behaviour as input to an inquiry into the nature of knowledge integration in practice,
since it is intentionally meant to be understood and therefore to contain at least the
seed of epistemic unity.
III
Third, and finally, any inherent vagueness and miscommunication between the
industry actors should not be defined away from the framework of empirical study.
Rather, the problem of vagueness should be incorporated as an implicit problem of
knowledge integration in the pragmatic realm. Anecdotally, anybody who has spent
any time in the construction business knows that misunderstandings indeed are an
important practical challenge and a defining aspect of industry interaction in the first
place. Even though it would be easier to conceptualise the positive, defining quality
of the collective horizon of action as a binary feature, e.g., either information has this
quality or it has not, the very concept of knowledge as an adverbial quality of action
does not logically necessitate such finitude or absoluteness. Rather, the defining,
structural quality of a collective horizon of action might just as well exist as a matter
of gradients, allowing weaker recognition within the action sequence just as well as
stronger, more definite recognition. This distinct possibility cannot be abstracted out
of the study, since it might be critical to the actual dynamic of the phenomenon,
critical to understanding how knowledge actually affects the aim of the action
sequence that is the construction industry pragmatic.
76
3.1.2 Conceiving knowledge as the enabling aspect of project information, as
an adverbial aspect instead of a stated belief or agreement
In this research, we are not looking for definitions of knowledge as stated, agreedupon beliefs; we are looking for what practically enables the industry to produce its
output. This means the problem cannot be approached directly by looking for
statements or proof of knowledge. Rather, the indirect approach seem necessary
since we want to make sure that it is the information that actually enables buildings
that we subject to epistemological scrutiny. This information does not necessarily
exist in a statement format where it can be deemed true, false or justified, etc. There
must be something, however, a characteristic or feature of information that makes it
either recognisable or unrecognisable to other actors than its source. If not, it will not
have an effect on the building and therefore cannot be a part of the knowledge that
produced it.
3.1.3 Emphasising adverbial qualities of information (how it informs)
During the research process, even when I had statements qualified as ‘justified true
beliefs‘, that is, things that could be interpreted as agreements or authoritative
knowledge definitions, I chose to stay with the adverbial understanding of
knowledge, trying to stay consistent with the assumed manifestation of practical
knowledge as a ‘how‘ aspect of action. In the form of information, this corresponded
to ‘how‘ a piece of information informs or ‘how it makes a difference‘ in the
processes, more specifically, how it makes a difference to the end product, the
building, as the universal knowledge object, towards which actions that make a
universal difference must be directed.
3.1.4 Formal and informal sources in the AEC industry
An important complication that comes with analysing operative AEC industry
information is that the level of formality of such information varies greatly from source
to source. Some of it might be closer to descriptive statements of the built end
results, some might be verbal information given at meetings, and some might be
mute actions on the construction site.
Yet, both formal and informal information sources are important to developing a
comprehensive picture of the practically enabling knowledge of the industry. There
might, however, be slight differences in how information from different sources
manifests themselves. Paying attention to this tension and finding common
denominators in this potential gap was therefore a key challenge in this study, and
the data sources or input selected aim to reflect both formalised and information
building information. This is not to say that the perfect dialogical balance was
necessarily achieved, however.
Fundamentally, the empirical aspect of this research (papers found in the
appendices) framework can be summarised in two key points: it anchors the
research to reality, where integration actually happens, thus making it descriptive,
and at the same time the empirical contexts or cases chosen also represent a frame
that delimits the scope of the research. While the first aspect is nothing short of
obvious given our problem formulation, the second is critical, since the theoretical
77
framework is an expansive one. Generating (more) new interpretations of reality or
making structural aspects of a phenomenon salient, pinning the research down into a
set, relevant empirical context is just as important as anchoring the research in
reality. Basically, this research represents a beginning. Here we have selected two
well-known or obvious manifestations of the collective horizon of action in the
contemporary building industry, one formal and one informal, one delimiting and one
expansive, one universal and one local, building codes and the project organisation.
With these two general considerations in mind, the empirical scope of this early
investigation can be defined by two principles. First, and most importantly, we need
to investigate features of the building industry where we know that knowledge
integration happens. Second, even if the increase of complexity might be a global
tendency, we chose to delimit the study to the Norwegian building industry because
this is the most available and familiar to the author and because the international
building industry contains variances from country to country that might better be
analysed comparatively, once one managed to establish some principles and
methods in a Norwegian pilot study.
Focusing on the Norwegian production situation, I investigated information that is
recognised across agencies of the process where I was most likely to find it in two
characteristic features of contemporary building industry. These are two critical
epistemological loci, where knowledge is actualised and embedded as input that
doubtless has an actual effect on all buildings presently being built. First, I
approached a formalised information source, representing societal interest and one
of the most critical institutional influences of building, namely the Norwegian building
code. Second, I investigated the building project as a knowledge exchange, since
virtually all building activity in Norway is in one phase or another organised as
temporary collaborative organisations. The project also represents a more informal
information context, serving us as a contrast to the more formal building code study.
3.1.4.1 Formalised building information in building codes
Building codes are perhaps as close as we get to universally recognised information.
Not only do they regulate the industry and its processes, they also contain normative
descriptions of its output, descriptions that must be understood and passed between
various actors. Interesting questions when approaching building codes from an
epistemological perspective then become: how does this document describe the
output (the building), and how does it ensure that this is universally recognisable and
implemented? How does the building code inform the AEC industry process? How
does the building code become pragmatically, universally recognisable? Also, as a
formalised source of knowledge or a summary of knowledge on the societal level:
how does the development of building codes work as a societal knowledge or
learning process? Are building codes a universally recognised learning process?
From a practical research perspective, investigating building codes is convenient,
since they come readily available in public documents. As such, building codes
represent an accessible and relevant source of building information which we know
have an impact and are recognised across time, intentions and professions in the
industry.
78
3.1.4.2 Informal building information in the project organisation
The project organisation comes close to being a universal locus of knowledge
exchange and learning in the AEC industry. Virtually all building processes are
organised as projects. It is within these temporary organisations where the
information exchange that shapes buildings happens. Project organisations are
therefore where knowledge integration must happen in practice. It is where some
pieces of information are recognised as relevant and other pieces are left out.
For the purpose of studying the knowledge exchange of the building industry, project
organisations are interesting in a different way from building codes. Vagueness
becomes a factor. The potential of misunderstandings becomes a factor, particularly
because the difference between what informs the process and what informs the
shape and content of the output is blurry in the contemporary building process.
It is within the project organisation that the differences between different interests
and competencies must be overcome in practice. The project organisation is less
about enforcing general interests, such as the building codes, and more about
interaction, social skills and negotiations, even if it can become an all-out war
between interests in particular cases. Naturally, It is also within the project that the
social aspect of knowledge and learning must exist in its natural or informal
manifestation.
3.2 Research design
The purpose of this research design section is to articulate the structure of the
method development, how this has been formalised and its general relation to
existing research and future applications in the AEC industry.
The logic of this research design follows the overall logic of the dissertation. By
retrospectively formalising an (non-linear) exploratory learning process, I aim to
show the connecting structures between the decisions, constraints and output that
came to characterise this research. As such, this research design should be
understood as ‘as built‘ documentation rather than as a preceding blueprint.
As a formalisation of the processual aspect of the research, this research design
consists of three parts. First, the research is situated and classified according to
Henri Poincaré’s knowledge curve introduced earlier in this dissertation. The purpose
of this analysis is to clarify the research problem's relation to existing industry
knowledge, particularly why and how it logically differs in aim, output and value.
Second, the topical, theoretical and methodical constraints guiding the explorative
(abductive) trial and error phase of the research are identified and articulated. The
third and final part of this section visualises the research process in terms of its
output and methodical components as a genealogy of the technique that is
generalised in the next chapter.
3.2.1 Situating the research on the knowledge curve
In this section we will apply Pointcaré’s knowledge curve, which was introduced
earlier in this dissertation, to situate the research. By placing the research in the
79
theory of science landscape, several critical aspects that differentiate epistemic
analysis and formalisation from the aims, output and values with which most of AEC
industry research is currently concerned.
Figure 3-1- Situating Peirce’s three forms of inference on the knowledge curve at the
interfaces between Pointcaré’s four phases of discovery provides us with a powerful
analytical tool for situating research problems, topics and insights, according to the
overall status of their development, in terms of primary forms of inference, the state
of information (empirical data constituting the phenomenon) and research aim.
In order to properly understand the deeper motivation behind the current research
design, it is useful to go back to the very start, to the research topic. Reflecting the
main research problem, the purpose of this research is threefold. First, It concerns
establishing an analytical perspective on the contemporary AEC industry as a
practical knowledge phenomenon in order to, second, methodically discover and
formalise its integrative epistemic mechanisms (or which operative principles allow it
to actually function the way it currently does) into some hypotheses or, more
precisely, abductions concerning the nature of knowledge as it manifests empirically
in industry information. Finally, it is our hope that these formalisations of existing
knowledge practices might be redirected back into the industry and have some kind
of application as a new perspective on some of the root problems currently
challenging value creation in the industry.
Fundamentally, this research concerns discovery and the formalisation of a method
for doing so. Consequently, the research design is primarily a problem of ‘how‘.
The structure of the research emerged from answering this fundamental ‘how’ and
‘why’ – why it has been conducted this way – and remains intimately related to how
80
the research problems relate from a theory of scientific perspective, particularly their
logical sequence, which also is key to understanding how the research relates to
applied industry research.
Figure 3-2. The lack of overlap between the research problem and applied industry
research can be understood in terms of what phase of discovery and knowledge
production is concerned. Working with problems such as epistemic descriptions
belongs in the earlier phases of discovery. Working in these earlier phases also has
methodical consequences for inference forms, research focus and validity.
The difference between this research and applied industry research is most
fundamentally defined by the aim. The contemporary AEC industry’s primary aim
appears to be that of solving the myriad of practical challenges its actors are faced
with every day on the construction site and in the project office. Developing an
epistemic description of the AEC industry, on the other hand, demands exploration to
establish some preliminary hypotheses to work from. Such starting points are
established through trial and error. From there, one can proceed with a systematical
formalisation of the theoretical framework, empirical technique and logical
procedures connecting observations with the overall descriptive-analytic epistemic
scheme.
Solutions that are to work logically rely on a higher degree of certainty (in order to
have universal validity and application), and therefore often rely on deductive
reasoning or, at best, statistical inferences or comparison of different methodical
schemes. A comprehensive review of the entire AEC industry research literature
according to the knowledge curve in order to gain a sound empirical ground of this
81
analysis would be very interesting, but is beyond the scope of a single PhD
dissertation aimed at applied knowledge reconstruction. However, working in this
field for close to 10 years has strengthened my belief that there is both theoretical
evidence – as in phenomenological circumscription of the AEC industry as a
fundamentally practical-productive endeavour – and anecdotal evidence that applied
industry research, which is likely to represent the closest link between actual industry
practice and the research community, aims to produce working solutions rather than
generate empirically based hypotheses concerning the epistemic nature of the
industry.
Figure 3-3. Aiming at an epistemic description of the AEC industry places the
research at the logical intersection between exploration and formalisation. By
contrast, a majority of current industry research appears to aim to provide the
business with new solutions or systems for dealing with the many complications of
multidisciplinary knowledge work.
The two first phases of discovery, the conscious and unconscious mapping,
skirmishing and probing of the phenomenon, moving it from chaos to complexity, can
tentatively be understood as an abductive action-dependent exploration process
which, once it delivers a sufficient number of possible consequences (that can be
tested), demands a more methodical formalisation in order to narrow down,
triangulate and generalise the insights into a working system of postulations (a
theory, technique or logic). Once some consequence or output of this system is
established and in turn delivers some degree of certainty in terms of reliable or
desirable effects when applied back into the phenomenon, the discoveries are
validated or falsified and, consequently, deductively provide a platform for
establishing solutions.
82
Another way of differentiating the current research from applied industry research is
in terms of the expected output of research, which logically also depends on in which
phase of the discovery the research is conducted.
Figure 3-4. While typical industry research works in the later phases of the
knowledge curve, usually at the intersection between complications and certainty,
generating new methods and practical applications, the labour of establishing an
analytic epistemic perspective on the same industry logically generates abductive
hypotheses to be tested, and methodical approaches that may, given the proper
amount of formalisation and systematisation, provide starting points for new tools,
competencies and applications later down the line.
Finally, to understand the motivation for, or rather the lack thereof, working at either
end of the knowledge curve, as the current research and the industry proper appears
to be doing, it is helpful to reflect on the immediate recipients of the value generated
in the respective phases, since this often coincides with interest and funding of
research
83
Figure 3-5. While the final goal might be truth and utility, different phases of
discovery produce value in different scales, with different scopes, to different groups
and people. Some of the current research, particularly the most formalised aspects
of the method development and the theoretical foundation of it, represents value to a
small community of specialists and experts. Due to the nature and state of the
problem, most of the value creation in this particular research remains in
development of the individual skills of the researcher, meaning the author and his
collaborators. The research has not reached the phase of validation, where it starts
taking the form of generalisable (universal) insights and public knowledge.
Reflecting the state of the research problem, the individual research papers
(Appendices 1–6) within the current research project are primarily aimed at bringing
the problem of epistemic description into the formalisation phase, where it
theoretically can be connected to AEC industry research literature. Abductive
inference has been critical to establishing a foothold in the largely unmapped and
complex landscape of AEC industry epistemology.
The following is a tentative placement of the individual research papers developed
during the course of this research project. Fundamentally, these are the direct output
of the explorative trial and error process of establishing some conceptual and
analytical foothold in AEC industry data. We will return to the output from the
research papers, first in the genealogy of technique where the methodical
components are broken down and synthesised, and later in the results section,
formalised in a logic of discovery, where the analytical diagrams provide the basis for
generating some abductive hypotheses concerning the nature and dynamics of
integrative knowledge principles in the Norwegian AEC industry, based on empirical
data.
84
Figure 3-6. Some of the papers produced align with thematic aspects of ongoing
industry research. Most of the research, however, remains unconnected to existing
AEC industry research projects. Consequently, even though important in this
particular research project and to the overall ambition of opening the AEC industry to
epistemic analysis, large parts of work appear either to be of a personal, intuitive
nature or still in the early phases of formalisation.
Combining the insights from work on the knowledge curve with the plot of the
research papers generates the following comparisons, differentiations and
descriptions of the typical AEC industry research project and of analytical
(empirically based) epistemic descriptions of industry practices. The diagram also
indicates the point of overlap (at least thematically).
85
Figure 3-7. The research papers generated during the course of this research are
largely concerned with explorative hypothesis generation, working analytically with
industry data to provide some preliminary description of the AEC industry as an
integrated knowledge phenomenon. Working with the data in this manner has
generated insights and skill on the level of the individual researcher that is yet be
fully formalised and made available to the general public. There is a small degree of
overlap thematically with certain aspects of current AEC industry research. Even
though the overlap may be sound from a theory of science perspective, the
difference in motivation and framing of the research, focusing less on solutions and
more on description, it is volatile, something which numerous (and lengthy) review
processes has demonstrated. The only realistic prospect of developing stronger
overlap is one of the three following measures: first, by providing the readers of the
research papers with the more formalised insights of the dissertation. Second, by
further developing the methods of this research towards industry applications. Third,
by providing the AEC research community with a set of formalised tools to further
introspective research into its own root mechanisms, which again is the primary aim
of this dissertation.
Finally, the knowledge curve also highlights the true relationship between the
individual research papers and the overall dissertation. Returning to our theory of a
science map of the research, a theoretical, conceptual relationship between the
research papers and the dissertation now emerges more clearly as the relationship
between empirically driven exploration of a topic (the papers) and the formalisation
of these explorations into a theoretical framework (logic of inquiry), analytical
techniques and a methodical approach to generating hypotheses on the nature of
86
knowledge integration in the AEC industry, based on the industry’s own information
exchange.
Figure 3-8. While the research papers represent the explorative aspect of this
research, this dissertation represents both the formalisation of the insight of these
explorations and a description of the enabling theoretical framework, method
development and how to interpret the results. In the short time frame of a PhD
research project, which was extended by over two additional years, it was not
realistic to venture into the validation phase, which represents the next logical step of
this research project, redirecting the potential insights into knowledge mechanisms
and analytical methods developed here back into then AEC industry as application
and knowledge management innovations.
3.2.2 Generating technique: a bottom-up learning process
As mentioned earlier, in the context of this method chapter I conceive research
design not in terms of an overall form or plan of the research method, but rather
understand the design process in terms of generating a framework of rules
governing or framing how the empirical element of research is dealt with. In this
sense, the purpose of this research design is to identify a set of rules providing an
operative, scientific scaffolding to form a bridge between conceptual and empirical
aspects of inquiry.
Three main constraints have informed or shaped this design: the research aim, some
theoretical tools and conceptualisations, and the nature of the empirical input this
research has dealt with.
I
First, the aim of the research is to look systematically into the unifying epistemic
aspects that enable the AEC industry on the practical level. This has apparently not
87
been systematically looked into before, and consequently is something of a
methodical knowledge gap.
II
Second, certain theoretical convergence points, such as the physical building being
the only possible common ground of knowledge (corresponding to Møystad’s object
of architecture (1994, 2017), and the pragmatic philosophical (behavioural science)
conceptualisation of knowledge has served as starting points, or preliminary beliefs
or departure points, for the inquiry, and id key to how we have approached industry
information and defined or circumscribed the units of analysis.
III
Third, and characteristic of the methodical problem the research technique needs to
address, is the shape of the input, being the empirical manifestation of knowledge in
a practical, production process. Even if some theoretical starting point was useful to
select the data that was potentially relevant for establishing a universal epistemic
perspective, the problem of the empirical manifestation of knowledge remains
theoretically unsolvable to a degree, due to the heterogeneous nature or state of the
phenomenon. This problem somehow had to be dealt with in a systematic,
transparent manner methodically, in terms of some rules of engagement; it needed
to be addressed and solved by technique, not by theoretical argument.
Within the framework of these constraints, the design of this research – generating
the rules for how we deal with empirical input – corresponds more to an active
inference learning process (Friston et al., 2015, 2016) rather than to applying a preestablished blueprint. The rules which later on in this chapter are formalised into a
general research technique needed to be learned from working with the problem
(exploratively) in context, coping with the real data. Another way of looking at this is
that instead of applying a complete design, the method, or more specifically the
technique, has been generated as a design in terms of some rules that would make
it. The research design that makes the inquiry replicable and useable by other
researchers further down the line only exist after the completion of the process of
discovery (the research papers) and the formalisation of this process (this
dissertation).
The first component, the preliminary stepping stone from which the learning process
kicks off, is establishing a belief or a preliminary prediction or model in terms of some
theoretical statements or notions in this case, since the topic of the research is
epistemological and somewhat abstract and theoretical compared to the daily
business of the AEC industry. Armed with a belief or an idea about what the common
ground of knowledge in the AEC industry – the common reference point of
knowledge – should theoretically correspond to, for example, the built object
(Møystad, 1994, 2017), I took this as my preliminary tool and started to analyse
industry data from this point of view: that references to the physical output of the
industry process, the building, must be of universal epistemic relevance. Basically, I
started to analyse information that referred, described and made a difference to the
built object and began looking for what such information could have in common in
terms of how it made a difference, whether it made a universal impact, something
that became a part of the finished building or whether something about its form made
it less impactful. The point of this starting point was not to prove the theory, but
88
rather to initiate a process of trial and error, looking at industry data from this
perspective to see whether this in turn opened up new perspectives, insights that
could be used to calibrate and further the inquiry. This development of a particular
technique, corresponds to the notion of an active inference process, where
‘epistemic habits emerge naturally from observing the consequences of one’s own
goal-directed behaviour. This follows from the fact that ambiguity can be resolved,
unambiguously, by epistemic actions (Friston et al., 2015, 2016). Put more simply,
the process of active inference is basically starting out with a belief, in this case a
theoretically informed hunch off which observations can be bounced, then adapting
and changing this belief (in a Bayesian sense) iteratively to better fit with the
observations (to reduce ambiguity), in this case the research input. Without a
scientific frame, this is basically a normal learning process; adding formalisation of
this into something replicable and generalising it into a set rules that can be
transferred to other situations and contexts of inquiry is what makes it scientific.
Adapting to and learning from the context the observation is characteristic of an
active-inference learning process.. In this sense, this research has worked as a
bottom-up generation of a technique that is generalised in this chapter. Because of
the methodical challenge of indirect representation of knowledge in AEC industry
information, paying particular attention to how the data made a difference in the
context became key to developing the technique. The analytical construct needed to
be built around the data, reflecting how they really made a difference in the realworld context, and the role of the modelling was to show and find patterns in the
data, not necessarily how they were perceived in context, but rather, analytically and
more abstractly, in terms of how they were working in this context, a feature that may
be non-salient. As a bottom-up approach to the overall technique development, the
overall form of the technique was developed from a set of components that gradually
were discovered and implemented. Working with the data from an epistemic
perspective, uncovering the working principles of how information becomes
universally recognisable in its context, is basically what made the relevant data
gradually emerge as the overall aim of the research technique. An important
advantage to working this way, with the phenomenon as the teacher and not trying to
dictate how the phenomenon should be improved (or how it should work), is that it
allows for a naturalistic perspective on knowledge rather than a normative stance.
The theoretical starting point then evolves naturally from a belief into a tool of
analysis, and works more as a handle operationalising the analysis rather than a
constraint or sorting device as it perhaps did in the beginning.
Developing a technique bottom-up, working from some theoretically informed beliefs,
does not mean that this work is methodically isolated. Rather, it turned out to be the
opposite. Several existing techniques (Yin, 2009; Krippendorff, 2013; Blumberg et
al., 2014), each suited to the contexts in different ways, proved useful, especially in
the data collection procedures. The difference is rather that since the theoretical
starting points are philosophical rather than methodical, there was no way of
contextualising the research within a specific methodical scheme. None fitted the bill,
so to speak. Rather; the research took the form of a behavioural reconstruction,
where the search for logics or patterns on the epistemic level guided the process or
effort, and conventional research techniques were called upon when needed but
were never applied in their ready-made textbook form. Because of this, most of the
components of the technique that came out of this learning process may be familiar,
89
but on account of the context and the purpose they were adapted for, they have not
been aggregated and systematised in this particular form before, meaning that from
this particular research design emerges a new formalisation of technique that reflects
the nature of the phenomenon as well as the scientific demarcation criteria of
replicability, validity and reliability. Many insights from traditional empirical research
literature and methodology are very much present in this technique, but it never
existed as a pre-made design until this final formalisation.
Finally, the methodical design scheme can be summarised as follows:
The following sequence exemplifies how this scheme worked out in practice:
1. Based on the theoretical analysis of convergence of a potential common
ground of knowledge, the reference to the physical building is chosen as the
defining criterion for data selection. This serves as a preliminary thesis or belief
about the nature of the industry; essentially marking the first step in the active
inference learning process.
2. Making regulatory references to the physical building, the unit of analysis in a
document analysis of the Norwegian building code generates an epistemic
interpretation or perspective of the code as a universally recognised description
of the built object or building, which essentially is something we are looking for
in the greater scheme of this research.
3. By using data capture techniques from established authors and methodical
literature, such as content analysis (Krippendorff, 2013), and document
analysis (Blumberg et al., 2014), we build a replicable representative case of
the building code as a universal description of buildings in Norway that may be
retraced and challenged by other researchers and that at the same time draws
on information that is used to settle controversies and inform decisions daily.
4. Then, by paying special attention to the form of regulatory statements of how
they describe an aspect of the building as something that must be implemented
to become legally recognised, an adverbial characteristic that makes a
difference to whether or not the information becomes implemented into the
physical building, and to what degree, is discovered and incorporated into the
technique as an analytic parameter. In the building code this corresponds to
any regulatory statements’ modality, expressing the necessity of the statement,
the adverbial characteristics of the statement, and a modal description of the
building
90
5. In the process of writing the research article on the building code's modal
description of a building, the first elements of the technique are formalising. By
understanding this as a technique instead of just a feature of the building code,
it became possible to reapply it, basically leading to: ‘Ok, let's see how these
descriptions of the built object have changed over time‘, not just in terms of
what it describes, but how it describes (the adverbial aspect, potentially and
pragmatically speaking, how the knowledge aspect has changed). This led into
a historical analysis of change in the Norwegian building code, basically
applying the technique developed working bottom-up with the current
Norwegian building code to every historical iteration of Norwegian building
regulations.
6. The next step in further developing the technique was to change the context,
applying the reiterated theoretical beliefs and finding analytical parameters to
analyse information qualification and knowledge exchange in a project
development case. Basically, applying what worked well in the previous
context, adapting it to the new by adding and adopting the elements of the
technique. The learning process is furthered and the technique is expanded,
tested and taken one step closer to generalisation
7. This process could have been continued ad infinitum by testing the growing
technical vocabulary in ever more cases, expanding into ever more relevant
contexts, but in reality time constraints made it necessary to draw a line at two
contexts and then start formalising the elements into a general method, both to
improve and resolve details and to make it available to the greater research
community as a product for the learning process, not only as partial iterations in
the method sections of the research articles produced in the process.
3.2.3 The research papers
The following is a list of the research papers attached in the appendices, with some
key information.
Paper I: (2018) Society’s blueprints: A study of the Norwegian building code’s modal
descriptions of a building
Time period: 2013–2018
Context: Norwegian building code
Data sources: Planning and Building Act of 2008, Technical Regulations of 2011
(current building code)
Research problems:
• How does the Norwegian building code describe a building?
• How do societal purposes in the building code come to expression as distinctively
• social concerns?
Authors: Jørgen Skatland (first), Ole Møystad (main supervisor), Jardar Lohne
(collaborator and secondary supervisor)
Presentation: (Barcelona?)
Publication: Nordic Journal of Architecture Research
Paper II: What happened in the building codes when the elevator came to Norway?
Time period: 2015–2016
Context: Norwegian building code history
91
Data sources: Historical and present Norwegian building code documents (acts and
technical regulations)
Research problems:
What happened in the building codes when the elevator came to Norway?
How did the regulatory description of elevators develop up to its present form?
How can this pattern of regulatory development be explained as specific types of
interaction between society and the built environment? (E.g., what kind or genus of
interaction can explain this kind of regulatory development?)
Authors: Jørgen Skatland, Jardar Lohne
Publication: CIB WBC16
Paper III: What happened to the bomb room? Changes in the technical regulations
for garages in Norwegian building codes between 1928 and 2015
Time period: 2015–2019
Context: Norwegian building code history
Data sources: Historical and present Norwegian building code documents (acts and
technical regulations), photos of cases
Research problems:
1. What is the nature of the development of the Norwegian Technical Regulation’s
description of garages since the first national wide Technical regulation of 1928 and
up to the present regulatory situation?
2. What are plausible explanations for the observed regulatory development?
3. How does the agency of the collective come to expression as changes in the built
environment over time?
Authors: Jørgen Skatland, Jardar Lohne, Ole Møystad
Presentation: ICAN18, Barcelona
Paper IV: Reconstructing knowledge integration in the Norwegian AEC industry
Time period: 2017–2019
Context: Conceptual paper
Data sources:
Research problems:
• How does epistemic unity manifest between and across the industry agencies,
despite their respective differences in stakes, goals, motivations and education?
• How can this phenomenon (of knowledge integration) be researched empirically
as opposed to normatively?
• How can these specific insights into the epistemic characteristics of the
contemporary AEC industry be applied strategically to improve current knowledge
management practices?
Authors: Jørgen Skatland, Jardar Lohne
Presentation: 10th Nordic Conference on Construction Economics and Organisation,
2019
Publication: 10th Nordic Conference on Construction Economics and Organisation.
eISBN: 978-1-83867-051-1 ISSN: 2516-2853. Publication date: 1 May 2019.
Paper V: Same game, different rules: A case study exploring epistemic differences
and similarities between five key actors in the early-phase development of a
shopping centre in Norway
Time period: 2015–2017
Context: Project case study
92
Data sources: Transcribed interviews with five key actors in the building process
Research problems:
1a. What are the similarities and differences between how the key actors qualify
information or input in a real estate development concept?
1b. What is the relationship between the total knowledge grounds of a development
concept and the individual actors’ accounts of what informed the concept (the
relation between the sum and the parts)?
2a. How do reports of conceptual success correspond with how information is
qualified? (What are the characteristics of ‘success information‘ in terms of our
analytic construct when referencing conceptual input with explicit expressions of
success among the case informants?)
2b. What reasons can be given for the correspondence between the success reports
and the information qualification patterns as correspondence between project
learning and perceived success?
Authors: Jørgen Skatland
Presentation: ERES 2017, Delft, ICAN16, Barcelona
Paper VI: Opening a perspective on the object of architecture_ An introductory essay
on thesis assertions
Time period: 2014–2015
Context: Conceptual
Data sources:
Research problems:
• Introducing the object of architecture
• The object as durability
Authors: Jørgen Skatland
3.2.4 Visualising the research process as a genealogy of technique
The following section interprets the research process as a genealogy of a technique.
The three figures in this section illustrate not just the published articles, but also the
failures on the timeline, with the major events (dated) when they occurred, and the
proportions between conceptual work and the two research contexts. The work on
the final dissertation began in 2017 and ran in parallel with the review processes and
conference presentations.
In the overall scheme of this dissertation, the link between the logic of inquiry
articulated in the theory and the logic of discovery will be covered in the upcoming
chapter. Consequently, this perspective on the process as the development of
technique is the second of three logical levels of formalisation covered in this
dissertation. In addition to be a necessary piece of the logical puzzle of this research,
this exposition serves two secondary purposes. First, it provides a link between the
iterations of technique in the process and the generalised technique as part of an
end product. By building the technique bottom-up from trial and error, including peer
reviews, we obtain an element of quality control in the research technique we
present here. Second, by formalising the research as a methodical learning process,
other researchers have quicker access to a more generalised version of the research
technique under a more precise heading, i.e., knowledge formalisation in the AEC
industry. By formalising, we also index a methodical contribution to the field of
epistemological inquiry, providing other researchers with direct access to the
93
methodical results rather than them having to stumble across them in thematically
varied research articles.
Presenting the research process as a genealogy of technique is somewhat a
personal choice. Even if the aim is to underpin and support the formalisation of a
particular technique, it is hardly the only valid way of representing a research
process. Faithful to the pragmatic, behavioural approach that underscores this
research, this section became a methodological reconstruction of my own work (and
a demonstration of its own method). This is the process in terms of how it has
generated the elements of technique later formalised in this method chapter.
Figure 3-9. The research process in terms of the research output, distributed over
time, according to the two main research contexts and purely conceptual papers.
As it was unclear to me how to define constraints of a state-of-the-art literature
review due to the special combination of epistemological perspectives on empirical
data from a practically-minded industry (and research community), I initiated the
research process with some conceptual papers. The first one of these was refuted in
a peer review and led me to reconsider the schematic abstraction level from which I
started. The next paper provided a conceptual basis for the first empirical research
into the Norwegian building code's description of buildings. Due to the methodical
innovations, the amount of work on this first empirical paper was considerable. It was
accepted for publishing already in the first year. The review process, however, lasted
almost five years, with many iterations. While working on the first publication, I
extended the analysis to the entire Norwegian building code history, developing two
more empirical papers, one that was published, another that was returned (citing it
was the wrong kind of paper for the journal). Some other topics were also explored
and presented at international conferences. Two years into the process, I also began
collecting data for the project case study, a process that included data processing
that took over a year to complete. I worked on the two contexts in parallel for the
94
remaining years of the scholarship until 2017, when began collecting and structuring
my material for this dissertation.
Figure 3-10. The analytical elements of the technique shown, according to the paper,
time and context in which they were developed.
The research technique in the general form presented later in this dissertation is the
iterative result of working with the empirical research problems (and data).
Not all the research papers generated new techniques, and there were several
junctures in the research where repeating the technique seemed more immediately
productive than pushing the development further. At one stage I had some original
data analysis concerning the history of the Norwegian building code which could
have become the focus of the entire dissertation. Still, due to the epistemic ambitions
95
of the research, in addition to the difficulty publishing in this well-established
(solutions-focused) research field, I chose to press on, developing the technique and
logic to also operationalise an informal data source.
Figure 3-10 shows some of the relationships between the contexts in terms of the
quality of technique development. In many ways, the building code studies became
the methodical pilot for the project case study, which in turn represented increased
sophistication (and generalisation) of the technique. Some of this sophistication
came to expression in the data visualisations. The final iteration of the model of the
project development data became a dynamic interactive data map. This final model
can be seen (and interacted with) at (https://www.urbantriggeragency.com/phd2022
.)
In retrospect, the paper on ‘What happened to the bomb room?’ seems too
methodically ambitious compared with the rest of the process. We can clearly see
that it contains more technical elements. This methodical complexity, combined with
the wrong choice of journal for epistemologically motivated building code research,
may be why it was rejected in reviews with few, if any, helpful comments.
In general, there appears to be a clear tendency in the direction of increased
sophistication of the analytical components of the technique, from very specific in
their context (in the case of building codes) to general (in the case of the project
organisation study).
The conceptual papers played a different role in the overall development of the
thesis. The first one was more a case of fumbling in the dark. The second was more
architectural theory-oriented. Here, however, I did identify the built object as an
epistemological handle, which is described in more detail in the vocabulary section.
The notion of the physical building as an epistemic focal point became an anchor for
data selection. The final conceptual paper was more of a summary of the research,
communicating and situating it in a building project management context. The
content was largely a summary of the introduction to the dissertation at the time, and
which later was revised into the current edition.
96
97
Figure 3-11. Classifying and sorting the elements which together constitute the
generalised research technique, showing their origins in the research process.
Finally, Figure 3-11 shows how the various elements stemming from different papers
fit into and contribute to the generalised technique. This visualisation shows the
origin of the technique, a basic taxonomy of elements. It is worth noting that some
elements are repeated throughout the work, such as the reference to the built object
as demarcating criteria for relevant data, and that some analytical parameters, such
as the time element, disappear when the research switched context from building
code history to project organisation. And that there is similarity yet development in
the models’ evolution. This illustration serves as a timeline for when different
elements were discovered during the research process. The elements will be
elaborated on in the following section dealing with synthesis into a general
procedure.

3.3 Technique
This section contains a description and systematisation of the techniques from the
research papers conceived as a particular set of rules that deals with how input – the
empirical aspect – has been dealt with in this research. My aim is to present a
generalisation of the technical aspect of the research as it exists as an emergent
product of the sum of the research articles. Instead of a summary of the method
sections as they appear in the articles, I synthesise the techniques into a product
directly accessible for other researchers without having to read the papers. Thereby,
the methodical product of this PhD research becomes more readily available to
further development, application and criticism.
Figure 3-12. The research technique is a formalisation of the methodical part of the
inquiry.
Certainty
Entropy Pointcaré`s four phases of discovery
3
4
2
1
1. Concious
mappping of
the problem
2. Unconcious,
intuitive, phase
3. Formalization,
working out the
details of the
argument
3. Validation,
hypotheis testing,
empirical validation
RESARCH PROCESS FORMALIZATION OF: FUTURE VALIDATION
1. LOGIC OF INQUIRY
2. TECHNIQUE
3. LOGIC OF DISCOVERY
98
The particular rules and operations outlined in this chapter produce an empirically
grounded epistemic representation of AEC industry information. This is achieved by
accentuating the adverbial aspect rather than the content of information that impacts
the buildings produced. The data are drawn from two universal, representative
features of the Norwegian AEC industry in a way that enables comparison between
the different data points. This ensures relevance to the pursuit of a universal
pragmatics or to some of the enabling principles of knowledge integration.
The technique section is divided into four parts. Data sources concerns the collection
and sampling aspect of the technique. Analysis deals with the bottom-up
development of an analytic construct for processing the raw data. Modelling deals
with the demand for a visual or diagrammatic data modelling, which enables us to
compare the units of analysis by juxtapositioning them in order to discover
similarities and differences in the adverbial aspect, forming patterns that demand or
generate explanations in terms of hypotheses or abductions concerning the nature of
shared knowledge and integration across the industry. Finally, the technique is
summarised into a generalised step-by-step procedure (that might vary slightly from
paper to paper), taking us from the features via raw data to the diagrammatic plot
models that constitute the findings of this study.
3.3.1 Data collection
3.3.1.1 Data definition
The data of interest in this study is building information. This is information from the
AEC industry production process which in some way makes a difference to the form
and content and/or practical realisation of the building. Starting with the lowest fruits,
we are primarily looking for descriptive statements that refer directly to the (future)
affordances of the building.
3.3.1.2 Contexts
Two distinct features of the Norwegian AEC industry have provided the data in this
study: building codes and concept development as it emerges in a project
organisation. The choice of what to study in order to have representative data for
typical Norwegian building industry behaviour was made on two premises:
representativeness and dialogue (between different aspects of the process in tune
with the heterogeneity of the AEC industry episteme). While representativeness of
typical industry practice was the primary criterion, it was also important to compare
the epistemic content of a universal feature of the industry (building codes) with a
local and temporary feature, such as the project organisation, since project work,
even if temporary and local, is almost a universal feature of the industry itself
(making it representative, even if it is unique). The purpose of this dialogical aspect
was to observe similarities and differences in different loci of knowledge integration,
since these also represent the divide between formal and informal information
sources. Either way, the data sampled should represent different manifestations of
typical behaviour and information in the industry.
3.3.1.3 Sources
99
The data sources for the building code studies were the Norwegian building code
documents. ‘Society’s blueprints’ was a study of the law in its contemporary form at
the time the research was conducted. ‘What happened in the building codes when
the elevator came to Norway?‘ was a historical review of changes in specific topics
from the first national building law of 1924 up to the time of the research. In addition
to its primary input obtained from contemporary and historical legal documents,
‘What happened to the bomb room?’ also contained secondary (discursive) input
obtained from three informal interviews with expert sources. Furthermore, it
discusses three case objects, each representing a historical iteration of a topic in the
Norwegian building code. ‘Same game, different rules‘, the project development
case, was a retrospective study of a commercial development project in Trondheim,
Norway between 2006 and 2012. The data material consists of five audio-recorded,
manually transcribed interviews with key actors from the development process
conducted during the spring of 2016.
3.3.1.4 Units of analysis
The data (units of analysis) were selected and defined by their reference to and/or
effect on the building, the actual end of the production process. This is a
commonality through all the studies based on our epistemological analysis of a
theoretical common ground of knowledge in the vocabulary chapter. In this study we
have defined building information on the basis of Bateson’s semiotic definition of
information, namely as a difference that makes a difference. Consequently, in our
inquiry into the nature of knowledge integration as it manifests as information
recognition, we have selected our empirical data based on their direct reference to or
effect on the affordances of the future built object.
3.3.1.5 Data collection methods
Three primary data collection methods were applied in this research: document
analysis (Blumberg et al., 2014), content analysis (Krippendorff, 2013) and case
study interviews (Yin, 2009). It was mainly the qualitative aspect of the data collected
that was considered, even though some quantitative aspects, such as number of
data sharing similar characteristics, became important in the comparison and
modelling.
3.3.2 Data analysis
The purpose of the data analysis was to provide a reading of the selected data, not
primarily in terms of what they describe (say), but rather emphasising how they
describe, and thereby how they enable the effect (form and content) they describe.
Basically, the analysis aims to reveal how information informs the output, i.e. the
building and the process of enabling it.
From a technical perspective, this section concerns, first, what the analytic construct
does to the data, or how the analytical operations accentuate a particular aspect of
the data that then becomes salient in the modelling. Second, where these analytic
parameters come from, since they are discovered and selected bottom-up from the
context from which the data were data collected, presumably working as part of the
pragmatics of this context.
100
The accentuation of the ‘how’ aspect of information constitutes a formalisation or
formal analysis. This is not an evaluation or validation of particular data within the
dataset. Rather, it comes down to a new way of looking at the industry information
that might enable us to discover how the information that makes a difference to the
output indeed has this effect. By making the theoretical connection to the pragmatic
understanding of knowledge – not as statements, but as qualities of action – I
postulate that insights into the ‘how’ aspect of information might correlate with
insights into the underlying, enabling epistemic mechanisms (as they manifest not in
the content of statements, but in the form and quality of information).
3.3.2.1 Bottom-up reconstruction and context sensitivity
In order to grasp the pragmatics of the context – how information actually was
enabled in its proper context – the analytical parameters needed to be developed
bottom-up from the sources. By carefully studying how information was stated, a
context-specific approach to knowledge as the quality of information was derived. In
the context of the building code, the most critical parameter to ensure
implementation and effect was the modality of the descriptive statement, e.g., how
strictly the law prescribes necessity to a specific solution. Ïn project development,
information qualification as a function of modality (along a spectrum from necessity
to potentiality) and particularity (how specific the information appears to be with
regards to causes and effects) characterised the degree of exchange and integration
between different actors.
Generally, the analytical parameters could be divided into two categories:
classification and qualification.
3.3.2.2 Classification
In order to be able to compare different topics and kinds of information, the units of
analysis were first classified according to topics identified as meaningful in the
context ,basically deriving the classification from the data source itself. In the building
codes ,the chapter structure dividing the text itself into topics was applied as a basic
taxonomy, reflecting the thematic structure of the source. In project development, the
process of developing a taxonomy was a little less automatic. I had to search for
common thematic denominators in several hundred statements (units of analysis).
Once a practical, yet fundamentally arbitrary, set of topics was established, each
containing at least a few statements, these pragmatic topics reflecting the general
conversation or information exchange in this particular project development (it would
be different with another project), another layer was added to the taxonomy. By
dividing the established topics into either information by quality, relation or reference;
three classes derived from C S Peirce’s stratified cognitive phenomenology
(Dinesen, 1991), a more universal level of taxonomy, was achieved. This more
abstract classification system added more general explanatory power as well as a
more transferable taxonomic parameter. Finally, in the project development case, a
final classification measure was added. By referencing the information piece to the
source actors from which these particular data were obtained, a powerful tool
comparison between different perspectives on the project was achieved.
101
3.3.2.3 Qualification
Moving on to information qualification, descriptive modality appeared to be a decisive
qualifier in both the formal building code and in more informal project organisation
contexts. Basically, building information always seems to contain a degree of
perceived (or explicitly stated) necessity. Modality appears to be a part of what
makes something worthwhile and qualified as information. A particular piece of
information appears to inform the project with a particular degree of necessity.
Adverbially speaking, information piece A is qualitied by its necessity, either absolute
physical necessity (such as the roof will fall down if not in compliance) or perceived
social necessity. It informs necessarily. This was very much the case in the building
code. After a closer look, this appears to be the very function of the legal
formulations: to modalise information in order to ensure its implementation. Failing to
adhere to the modalisation (the qualificator of the information; its adverbial quality)
would make the solution and, by extension the output – the building – unlawful and
unsanctioned by society. In the context of project development, modalisation
appeared to have another aspect. The actors appeared to qualify information in
terms of perceived necessity and in terms of the future potential to incorporate
information; that a certain difference would emerge, either for future use or for use in
the project process. In the informal context, information modality manifested as a
continuum, stretching from absolute necessity (such as accounting for gravity) via
social necessities and shared potential to pure singular potentiality, such as poetic
novelty. As a qualifying axis, this modal span was again affected by the degree of
particularity a given piece of information was stated with. As an adverbial
characteristic of information, particularity can in the special case of building project
development be understood as how well information is connected to other
information in the process (a notion akin to Paul Thagard’s naturalisation of
coherence networks (2000)) in terms of causes (history) and effects (future), and
how unambiguously it is grounded in the output or the process. Basically, whether it
makes a difference to the physical output of the process, e.g., the building, or
whether it has a more temporal effect on the process of enabling the building. The
actors themselves might not distinguish much between references to process or
object, but the difference to the future user is absolute. Particularity of information is
therefore a potentially powerful analytic parameter if someone in the future wanted to
connect knowledge in the building process to the experiences of the user of the
building.
3.3.2.4, Comparison and relativity
While classification of information was executed discretely into either–or topics, the
analysis of modality and particularity proved challenging. Even though modality and
particularity both have absolute interpretations, which, particularly in the building
code context, was part of the purpose of modalisation, a critical aspect of at least the
epistemological interpretation of adverbial characteristics is how to deal with degrees
and nuances. Vagueness, not only verbal, but also of intent and precision in
behaviour, is an inevitable fact in building production. Vagueness has (real) effects.
In dealing with this difficult aspect under time constraints during the research, some
trade-offs and compromises had to be made. Theoretically, the scales of modality
and particularity had to be conceived as continuous, with potentially endless
differentiations of degrees. Practically, when analysing and assigning qualification
102
degrees to the units of analysis, it remained unrealistic to operate with this kind of
infinity. As the research aim was also to study knowledge integration, particularly
regarding universal information recognition, it seems reasonable to assume that the
general sophistication of the project organisation or the industry collectively applying
the building code would limit the pragmatically relevant subdivision of modal and
particularity nuances. The solution chosen was to keep the continuum as a
theoretical possibility and let this shape the form of the diagrams used to model the
data while assigning the data qualitative degrees according to certain scales. In the
case of the building code, this scale of modalities was derived from the document
itself by identifying four distinct degrees of necessity operationalising the building
code, spanning from strict quantified necessity via (absolute) regulation and
cohesive recommendation down to the more open-ended recommendation. Each of
these classes was imagined to have very different consequences on the variation of
acceptable practical solution that could correspond to the legal statement. In the
project development case, the scale was a relative subdivision from 0 to 1, not
necessarily reflecting any true interpretation of the information, but rather
distinguishing relative degrees within the dataset, meaning that information
qualification degrees in one project did not necessarily translate to another without
developing a reliable measure of the differences in organisational sophistication.
These trade-offs were considered acceptable in a pilot case context while the
technique as the analytical construct was developed bottom-up from specific cases
and would need further testing and expansion (into a more universally valid
taxonomy) to increase general validity.
3.3.3 Data modelling
The purpose of a diagrammatic representation of the data is to enable a comparison
(Tufte, 1997, 2006) of heterogeneous data between information about different
elements of the AEC industry, even from different sources, first to gain a
comprehensive picture of the industry in terms of its qualifying aspects and then be
able to, by comparison, discover the similarities and differences that would enable us
to postulate some preliminary hypotheses concerning the nature of unifying
knowledge or common denominators in information recognition and qualification.
Furthermore, a diagrammatic representation of data also allows us to circumvent the
salience of information content and produce a new reading of the industry altogether,
accentuating the enabling (presumably unifying) characteristics of information that
are discovered as universally recognised compared to less recognised information.
3.3.3.1 Diagrams
The diagrams were designed as circular plot diagrams. The circle has the unique
characteristic of allowing for both a theoretically unlimited subdivision into sectors
and a radial axis, or the position between the centre and the rand zone can denote a
continuum between 0 and 1. Exploiting this advantage, circle sectors came to denote
the thematic taxonomy of the datasets, and the plots’ relative position on the radial
axis represents its modal degree relative to the other plots. In the project
development case, the particularity parameter represented a problem because the
circular diagram became – at least in theory – a polar sphere in order to contain all
the parameters. This was solved by separating the particularity aspect and
103
juxtapositioning these as a separate set of plots in an adjacent diagram. This is a
weakness of the final study, since the geometries of the spherical plots might hold
special meaning, being three-dimensional patterns. However, it was deemed an
acceptable trade-off, given the nature of the research question in this particular
research article. Three-dimensional plots were tried, however, using digital
programming in R-language, and even though these never made it into the articles,
there is definite potential to develop the model digitally in future research to
incorporate additional analytic dimensions. The manual plots and 2D representation
appear to have a critical limit of handling 3/4 dimensions only. In the final iteration of
the project development case, a dynamic model was also developed in which one
could hover over the data plots with the cursor and show their content, the
corresponding plot in the particularity diagram, as well as the source actor.
3.3.3.2 Data plots
The individual data plots representing the units of analysis – typically a descriptive
statement making a difference to the building – are referenced with a number that
can be traced back to the source location in the building code text or the transcribed
interviews in the project case. The problem of data transparency was solved to a
degree and taken to a new level by developing digital dynamic models capable of
showing the actual statements when the plots where clicked on or hovered over.
Beyond that, the advantage of referenced diagrammatic plots is evident in two ways
when compared with traditional qualitative research. First, one can easily compare
several plots, finding patterns depending on the analytical choices one makes in a
large dataset rather than depending on in-depth grammatical, syntactic and
hermeneutic analysis. Second, one also gains a certain quantitative perspective,
which to a degree opens a text or verbal material to statistical analysis or at least to
inductive inference and pattern recognition, not replacing but expanding traditional
qualitative discussions concerning original meaning and interpretation of standpoints,
power relations, stakes, mediation and motivation of the data source agent.
3.3.3.3 Analytic construct
Finally, it has been critical that the diagrams illustrate the analytic construct as well
as the data plots. Since the primary purpose of the data modelling is to generate a
new epistemic representation of industry information, it is not the content of the data
that matters the most, but rather its enabling form. In order to ensure that this is
transparent in the reading, the diagrams must be able to convey the analytical
construct and its dimensions and relative scales as well as contain the data plots in a
readable manner.
3.4 Procedure
The following procedure fulfils the purpose of the technique; it covers selecting
features and sources to selecting raw data, analytical operations augmenting the
data and visualisation of the data into diagrammatic plots enabling a new reading of
AEC industry information in terms of their adverbial characteristics, pragmatically
corresponding to the knowledge aspect of information.
104
1. Choosing context/feature of the AEC industry and empirically available
sources of this feature.
2. Collecting the raw data.
a. Document studies of Norwegian building acts and technical regulations
b. Open-ended case study interviews.
3. Preparing the raw data.
a. Document studies: Choosing relevant parts of the document to analyse
b. Case study: Transcribing interviews.
4. Identifying units of analysis, assigning them a reference number to render
them retractable.
a. Description of the built object.
b. Information that makes a difference to either the built object or the process.
5. Selecting bottom-up analytic parameters: how the data work in context
(effects).
a. Taxonomic.
b. Qualifying (as information) adverbial aspects characteristically, enabling
information exchange in the context or enabling the contextual meaning of
the information.
6. Preparing and adapting the diagrams to reflect the chosen analytic construct.
7. Analysing the data by assigning each unit of analysis with a topic
(classifying) and degree of modality/particularity (qualifying).
8. Plotting the data manually, a process that could be automated by simple
computer programming.
9. Both steps 7 and 8 can be repeated separately or together, either adding a
degree of Bayesian confidence (increasing the reliability of the study) or
doing the analysis x number of times and doing a Monte Carlo analysis to
obtain a measure of variability of the analysis (to quantify uncertainty).
10. Further plots, selecting certain features of the data to study by means of
other visualisations.
3.5 Limitations
Having outlined the technique, there are certain limitations that need to be
considered. The main limitation that needs to be kept in mind is that this technique –
the entire methodical approach – hardly produces the truth about or a better
perspective on the AEC industry. Rather, this technique produces a new
representation of a part of the AEC industry reality, a specific aspect of the industry
that interests us: the knowledge aspect.
In short, the product of this study is an epistemic representation of building industry
information, seen from an action-philosophical perspective. Like any other partial
representation of reality, the results of this inquiry are limited in scope, reliability and
validity.
3.5.1 Scope
Two critical aspects frame the scope of the technique as it stands in this dissertation.
First, methodically speaking, this work is a pilot study. It is the first step towards
developing a technique that helps us operationalise the epistemic study of the AEC
industry. As such, regardless of how much effort I have put into formalising both the
105
logic of inquiry and the technique, it is still in its infancy. It is a rough early sketch that
needs refinement, development and critical eyes. Even if the technique and the logic
of discovery can be conceived as a product, neither of them is a finished product, nor
are they products that can be completed by one researcher alone.
Second, the totality of the AEC industry as a knowledge system must be assumed to
be much more comprehensive and complex than the few parts of it I have managed
to cover by studying selected cased of only two aspects. Even if we have managed
to identify some crucial enabling aspects of knowledge integration, there might be
other mechanisms that override the ones we have found, and there might be parts of
the knowledge hierarchy that we have not yet even tapped into. The only way to
place and establish the role of the elements this method is able to uncover is to
develop the analysis further by expanding the scope, incorporating a wider context,
replicating the study within the context with more sources, and expand the search for
analytic parameters, or adverbial qualities, working within each context. Developing
the technique is just the first step towards a comprehensive methodology of the AEC
industry, or epistemology of the AEC industry, which is the broad scope or empirical
horizon of this work.
3.5.2 Reliability
The primary reliability limitation to keep in mind when reading the results produced
with this particular technique is that the researcher’s judgement will be present in the
results.
There is human judgment involved in determining what data fits with the unit-ofanalysis criteria, evaluating and selecting analytic parameters that seem to have an
effect in the context of analysis and, finally and most critically, in the process of
assigning the qualitative degrees of the respective parameters. Some of these
operations might be automated using content analysis software in the future,
especially in developing the technique, since certain trial and error and learning by
doing are not only necessary, but they are also needed to really understand both the
potentials and limitations of the approach. The interpretive aspect of the research
process is in many ways no different from how information is interpreted daily in
project offices and on construction sites. The only differences are the particular
aspect on which this research focuses and the scientific demands of replicability,
which is the main measure of reliability in the technique at this stage of the
formalisation. The technique is a tool, and tools as affordances are seldom automatic
or fool proof. Tools depend on the skill of the researcher, as does the analytical
aspect of this technique.
By assigning reference numbers to each data plot, connecting them to the source
text, the study becomes replicable and open to critique. Anybody can in principle
retrace the steps of the researcher and challenge their judgment at every step. Any
critic will, however, need to make their own judgment in place of the original one,
thus making the judgment aspect not a scientific weakness, but actually a critical
component of fallibility, which is the scientific demarcation criteria par excellence. In
the last iteration of the data modelling, the source text is even available in the model
by clicking the data plot. This dynamic solution to reliability, though highly labour-
106
intensive for the researcher, is perhaps this research’s primary contribution to
qualitative research methods in general.
While I have accentuated the necessity, even the desirability, of human judgment as
a key reliability issue in this technique, there are several statistical methods available
for either improving confidence in the judgment process or providing a measurement
of uncertainty present in the research. By replicating each analytical operation in the
study, we could proceed to find the convergence value of each analytical operation
by means of Bayesian analysis. Or, if a measure of uncertainty is preferred, by again
replicating the analytical operations if the controversial or difficult judgements in the
dataset could be discovered and mapped by means of Monte Carlo simulations. I am
not an expert on either, but these are well known, proven statistical techniques and
forms of inference that would significantly improve reliability in this study. In a pilot,
when we are developing and trying out a technique manually, this improvement is
not necessary because this logically would belong in the validation phase of the
research and is not that valuable during formalisation. These statistical methods and
others should, however, be incorporated into the general technique in the future,
alongside automation and computer-aided data collection methods and analyses. By
doing so, one will gain a more reliable tool that would be more transferable across
contexts and not limited to the AEC industry alone.
3.5.3 Validity
The primary validity issue associated with this kind of research technique is deeply
rooted in the methodical problem we aim to solve, namely that we try to make the
indirect explicit.
There will always be a degree of distortion of reality when one tries to make
something hidden salient. It remains critical to any reader of these results, as to any
potential user of this technique, to understand and acknowledge that this kind of data
analysis and modelling produces a new representation of reality. The diagrammatic
modelling of the knowledge component of AEC industry information that is achieved
using this particular technique does not exist naturally within the industry processes.
It is a more abstract, artificial perspective that typically would remain unrecognisable
to any industry actor.
It is not until we postulate some abductive hypotheses on the basis of this new
perspective that can be tested in practice that this research approach becomes
validated in the common, empirical sense of the word. The feedback loop between
(new) observation and (practical) reality needs to be tested in action.
From a more theoretical perspective, however, the new perspective produced by this
technique can be regarded as scientific, even before validation, because it enables
new questions to be asked about the nature and dynamics of the AEC industry as a
naturally occurring phenomenon. This technique does indeed produce a new
representation of reality, but not as a true or false statement; rather, it delivers a new
set of question marks to a minimally formalised branch of human behaviour and
thereby opens the road of inquiry rather than narrow it down into procedural
correctness and proof.
107
Furthermore, the validity of the technique is related to the enabling aspect of the
information, or its adverbial qualities, not interpretation of content or the information’s
original meaning. The representation of AEC industry information achieved remains
an analytical one, and this means that some industry actors probably will question
the validity of the interpretation simply because it is unrecognisable when compared
to the typical, everyday reading of similar information or data within the production
context. I also encountered these kinds of problems when presenting the research to
experts on the Norwegian building code. The analytical parameters, scales and
aspects I had chosen to structure the data were, according to several researchers,
impossible, incorrect or a misunderstanding of what the building code really was or
how it was developed. Even though this is thought-provoking, and even valuable, in
a peer review setting, they all missed the mark since none of them actually
addressed the analytical perspective this technique actually provides. This technique
aims to render salient how information pragmatically works by virtue of some
inherent quality (the adverbial quality, which I assume to be part of the knowledge
content of the information). It is not a normative or deontological (as in what it should
be) evaluation of information content nor the intentions behind the information,
especially in the case of the building code history. There are certain narratives in
society and within research communities, written or spoken after the fact, that always
try to explain history and the present as rational and reasonable, and that the way
things are done guarantees the rationality of the whole matter. My aim with this
research is not to criticise or polemise over current and historical practices but rather
to open new avenues of inquiry. The political implications of doing so have and will
continue to prompt questions concerning the validity of this line of research, simply
because it paints an unfamiliar image of something which many professionals are
comfortably familiar with.
From the validity perspective, this particular technique does not produce conclusive
evidence about the nature of knowledge in the AEC industry. Rather, it takes a first
step towards a method for formalising practices. It aims to enable a preliminary
description of knowledge as it already exists in hierarchical principles and qualities of
action, within a particular field of productive conduct. The purpose of the research
constrains its validity within the realm of fallible hypothesis formulation.
Reconstructing and analysing the underlying mechanisms enabling the integration of
knowledge in a fundamentally heterogeneous industry will always be hypothetical at
best and speculative at least. Logic is hardly superior to practical reality; it is merely
useful. Reality will always overrule the results of a study like this. Its primary validity
will fundamentally be determined by its ability to grasp the hidden mechanisms of
practice more directly and with less distortion than current industry research.

4. LOGIC OF DISCOVERY
Minding the gap between analysis and application
The difference in abstraction associated with philosophical inquiry and AEC industry
applications demands a logical procedure linking (our) epistemological observations
to actionable principles that can be tested in practice. Providing such a logic remains
imperative if the analytical reading provided by the vocabulary and technique is to be
of any value to industry practitioners beyond the realm of pure research.
108
Applying the theoretical vocabulary and the technique outlined in the method section
produces new interpretations of industry information. They produce some
epistemological readings of industry information which in themselves demand
interpretation. On their own, the findings produced in the form of analytical diagrams
and new observations do not necessarily relate to their previous context as operative
information in a productive pursuit.
This gap between the previous operative meaning of the data we have analysed and
the new epistemological readings reflects the long distance between philosophical
(and particularly epistemological) inquiry and AEC industry applications. It is largely
a gap of abstractions, of universality or particularity. The consequence of an
analytical descriptive reading of AEC industry data is that a new, somewhat
unfamiliar, image of the industry emerges, which in turn demands systematic
interpretation to be of any value beyond philosophical discussion.
Part of the thesis that motivates and grounds this research point towards the need
for a logic that bridges analytical description and industry application. What is
needed is more than a correct interpretation of the empirical findings produced. The
depth of the gap requires a structured, methodical way of linking the different
abstraction levels associated with the extreme ends of epistemological inquiry and
the know-how that matters on construction sites. The need for a logic that can be
broken down into steps and operations, each with their valid forms of inference and
contexts of interpretation, also becomes evident by the fact that the findings
generated by this specific vocabulary and technique can and should be read at
several different levels, each with their philosophical, scientific and practical
implications and limitations.
Figure 4-1. The logic of discovery as the final part of the formalisation of the
research.
109
4.1 Levels: the logical steps of discovering application
value
Fundamentally, the purpose of the proposed logic is to transform the reading of the
data from a logical (deductive) product of the technique, via a step of likeliness or
salience, to something testable and actionable that would have real consequences if
reapplied back into the AEC industry.
Figure 4-2. Seen in terms of the knowledge curve, the movement from analytical
observation to potential application is a movement from deductive and true (as an
output of the technique) via induction (likelihood of a pattern recognition being
relevant) back to abduction. Even if it is uncertain before tested, abductions have the
most explanatory power of the three primary forms of inference. The final abduction
does not only have potential validity within a logical system, such as a deduction or
as a statistical sample within a bounded set such as (mathematical) induction, but
also has validity in terms of working in action in the world, being evaluated based on
whether it generates desirable effects when applied in practice.
Reflecting the three basic forms of inference and the movement between them, the
proposed logic of discovery has three levels, or layers. It is important to note that the
results exist on each of these levels and on the trade-off one obtains in terms of
reducing certainty, but increasing the scope of validity is a gain in explanatory power
that comes with increased speculation.
Steps and forms of inference
I
Observing new totalities or epistemic readings of industry information is the
deductive consequence of applying the vocabulary and technique.
110
II
Recognising patterns in the data. This involves making inductive observations in the
datasets that may represent general tendencies or salient features that demand
explanation.
III
Completing the observations by means of abductive inference, producing testable
action principles.
Figure 4-3. In summary, these three steps formalising the process of discovery,
represent goals in themselves. The results can be read on each of these levels, each
representing a type or layer of particular knowledge or insight. When applying this
layered logic, there is more than luck and hunch guiding us when we aim to make
connections between epistemic observations and potential applications. Rather, the
process starts to resemble a game with specific rules which also provide access to
other researchers. The gap between observation and application becomes more
analytical, a structured approach that can be moved between contexts. The value of
the results is more than just the interpretation of a dataset; it gains general value
through its form rather than just its content.
111
4.1.1 Level 1: new totalities
Level 1 of this logic of discovery consists of diagrammatic representations of new
totalities, new representations of reality. In this first layer the plots read as a
representation of the adverbial content of information, and therefore as pragmatically
enabling knowledge content as they are illustrated in the diagram. As such, this
reading is truly a representation of knowledge content, given that the pragmatic
theory of knowledge (on the level of the logic of inquiry) holds. This first logical level
is deducted in terms of technique and is valid only as such, and the subjective
content of the observer (researcher) can be reduced and improved upon almost
infinitely by means of replicating the analytical procedure and finding converging
tendencies by (any) Bayesian means or by providing explicit measures of uncertainty
applying Monte Carlo modelling or similar measures.
4.1.2 Level 2: recognising patterns
Level 2 proceeds to uncovering patterns, looking for oddities in the new
representation of the information that might reveal insights into underlying
mechanisms, root problems, distortions of meaning and tendencies (exceptions).
The second layer of reading the plots consists of pattern recognition. By addressing
salient features of the data plots, such as prominent patterns and oddities, we can
make a statistical selection or inductive inference towards something within the
dataset that is likely to have a particular meaning. This meaning should be
understood relative to the totality of the data plots in each model or to two
comparable models seen together as a tendency.
Even if there are countless potential patterns in the data plots, there appears to be
three principal ways of particular interest to the analysis of where? knowledge
interfaces occur:
1. Within one diagram, some things might stand out (statistically, by comparison,
by juxtaposition).
2. By plotting data from two sources in the same diagram to see similarities and
differences.
3. Juxtaposition diagrams representing different stages of a development, either
in the original diagram (a) or by changing the format and visual representation
(b) to see tendencies clearer; see connections in time in a linear fashion. For
example, by adding timelines.
4.1.3 Level 3: completing the observations
The final level of the logic of discovery is the most speculative – and creative – mode
of inference. It is also the final step we need to make the study relevant as science in
the applied, real-world sense (not just as a formal exercise). Here, we construct a
bridge between observation and potential applications by providing some logical
steps, transforming the observation into something immediately testable.
The abductive stage of the reading generally consists of completing an observation
within the dataset with a ‘what if‘ postulate and then act as if this were true in order to
112
see how it works (what the consequences of this being true would be if applied in
practice), generating a heuristic action principle to test that would be validated if the
outcome would indeed be desirable when applied.
From a scientific perspective, the purpose of the abduction as a form of inference,
completing the observation into something actionable, is that one obtains a heuristic
to use, but more importantly, the insights from the observation become testable and
falsifiable in practice, both more useful and falsifiable (even if they become less
certain or less deductive)
The abductive, logical steps applied on this level of reading are:
1. Making an incomplete observation (something that does not immediately add
up).
2. Completing this observation with an explanation in the form of ‘what if‘.
3. Inferring what the consequences would be if this indeed were true: ‘if ... then ...’
4. Articulating an action principle to follow that incorporates this new insight (into
desirable consequences).
5. Determine where this principle would be testable in practice and what it would
validate or falsify in terms of desirable outcomes when applied.
4.2 Examples: reading the empirical findings
4.2.1 Level 1: new readings/interpretations
4.2.1.1 New totalities visualised
In this example I have chosen the most basic new perspectives developed in this
research, examples of a formal and an informal data source.
113
Figure 4-4. The Norwegian building code, by topic and modality, showing a new
perspective on how the Planning and Building Act and the technical regulations
enforce their various descriptive content by assigning varying degrees of necessity
and quantification to different regulatory statements. This new totality provides us
with insights into what the Planning and Building Act accentuates (and what it merely
mentions) concerning the constraints of what eventually will be built.
Figure 4-5. The totality of a Norwegian shopping centre development, accentuating
the difference in how information is qualified by different actors, but also
114
differentiating between information pertaining to the process and information that
actually makes an impact on the physical building built by this organisation. This
reading gives us an impression of the relative distribution between different classes
of information and topics, and how different agents in the process contributed to
different parts of the process and end product.
In both these cases, the direct consequence of applying the technique is shown. This
(technical) output represents a new totality, a new reading of previously non-salient
features (structural features) of the Norwegian building code and a typical or
representative building project process case study. These new totalities represent a
new way of modelling and seeing the reality in (or behind) building information. It is
not a better perspective than the operative meanings that are put in the background,
nor do they claim to be the one true meaning of the underlying data.
These are both compressions and expansions of the input sources. Behind these
two diagrams there are hundreds of pages of densely written laws and regulations in
the case of the building code, and even more interview transcriptions in the case of
the project study. At the same time as it compresses the text into an expressive
image, it also expands some previously hidden structural features of the information
and renders salient what previously only could be experienced in effects.
The fact that these new totalities are composed of atomic plots also means that the
new perspective is composed of internal juxtapositions of elements. These enable
comparisons between parts which previously remained relatively unrelated in their
original operative form, since they may have been arranged in separate locations in
the texts and seldom seen in relation to each other by the same actor or discipline.
4.2.1.2 Comparing totalities with parts
Comparing totalities with its parts opens perspectives on the interplay between
leadership, concept ownership and specialist concerns both in the case of project
development and in the context of building codes. The contemporary building project
is a complex endeavour that depends on the competencies of many different
disciplines, all of which claim influence and control over the process. These kind of
diagrammatic analysis and comparison shed new factual light on many of these
claims and reveals some of the mechanisms characteristic of both crosscollaboration and specialised contributions to a typical building project. Both
professional isolation (the traditional silo thinking) and overlap seem to play
important, yet different, roles in the process, according to these epistemological
mappings.
115
Figure 4-6. The following comparisons show the difference between how the
Planning and Building Act, as the top level of the regulatory pyramid, describes a
building compared with the image created when one adds the details of the technical
regulations. From the relative balance of the Planning and Building Act, adding the
secondary level of the building code transforms this most formal description of
Norwegian buildings into a mostly technical concern, which is also the practical or
built effect of these two regulatory levels working together. For more detail, see the
paper entitled ‘Society’s blueprints’ (Appendix 1).
Figure 4-7. In these diagrams we compare the project development case as a whole
with the contributions of a single actor who, according to their own account, was
leading the project. This comparison between the whole and one of its parts
illustrates the interplay between the complexities of contemporary development
processes and the specialised contributions of single disciplines, regardless of their
relative position in the project hierarchy. This particular actor was clearly involved in
a broad variety of the themes characterising this project development, but compared
to the whole, their insights and contributions remain marginal, except in the case of
their specialty, which was technical infrastructure, seen in the breadth and
particularity of this topic. For more details and additional actors, see the paper
entitled ‘Same game, different rules’ (Appendix 6)
4.2.2 Level 2: observing patterns
Departing from merely observing new totalities and the immediate output of the
technique, the second analytical level proceeds to discovering patterns and finding
oddities in the new epistemological representation of information that demands
116
explanations; explanations that may reveal insights into underlying mechanisms and
more deeply rooted problems such as distortions of meanings, exceptions and
biases.
The basic mode of this level is attention towards whatever becomes salient in the
analytical visualisation of building information. This may be – but is not restricted to –
pronounced similarities and differences, or connections between and differences in
previously unconnected information. We are looking here for telling details utilising
the human capability for pattern recognition, a behaviour that might be further
enhanced by means of artificial learning (AI) in the near future.
At this level, there appears to be at least four basic ways in which interesting
patterns may occur:
1. Within one diagram, some things might stand out (statistically, by comparison,
by juxtaposition).
2. By plotting data from two sources in the same diagram to see similarities and
differences, convergences and divergences.
3. By juxta positioning diagrams representing different stages of a development
4. By changing the format and visual representation into timeline perspectives to
see tendencies clearer and to see connections in time in a linear fashion.
The following are examples of each of these four situations found in the research
papers.
4.2.2.1 Salience and oddities
Figure 4-8. This diagram shows that the eight most prominent topics in the
Norwegian building code’s modalisation of buildings, from most prominent to least,
are: 1. Technical requirements, 2. Universal accessibility and reliability, 3. Lifts and
escalators, 4. Design, 5. Location, heights and distances, 6. Technical installations
and systems, 7. Access, and 8. Waste management. These are the most prominent
features of the new totality, an observation which in itself demands explanation: why
does the contemporary Norwegian building code give such a priority to its content?
For more on this discussion, see the paper entitled ’Society’s blueprints’ (Appendix
1).
4.2.2.2 Comparing patterns in the same diagram
Sewers
Connection to private infrastructure
Access
Building land
District heating
The undeveloped part of the lot.
Common area
Preservation of environment
Design
Preservation of cultural value
Projects in existing structures
Safety and repair
Demolition/ change of use
Improvement program
Visual qualities
Technical requirements
Technical installations and systems
Construction products
Waste management
Lifts and escalators
Universal accessibility and reliability
Location, heights and distance
construction work
Safety measures for
Measures on adjoining
land
Making fencing safe
Making Pools, wells
and ponds safe
of undeveloped land
Tidiness and use
Water supply
Quantified
Regulation
MODALETIES
(Absolute)
Regulation
Cohesive
Recommendation
Recommendation
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
12 11
13
14
25
31
32
33
34
41
42
43
43 53
52
44 56
57 58
59
60
61
62
63
67
64
65
66
55
36
45 48 49
50
51
46
47
38
39
40
37
35
30
29
22
23
15
16
17
26
54
28 27
20
24
21
18
19
1
7
67
42
2
238
242
241 240
239
4 127
261
274
285
267 270
266
293
277
277
262
263
272
273
268
280
271
276 292
269
275 284
265
264
294
295 287 291
286
48
187
51
46
49
50
47
45
24
88
98 99
5
68 92
8
73 74
129
129
166
91
75
53 79
61
63
64
62
58
77
78
54
52
10
100 173 148
102
112 113
111 105
130
106
149
117
126
156
157
199
205
204 203
202
201
200
198
196
212
227
243
237
236
235
234
233
232
231
230
229
228
225 223
221
219
218
217
216
215
214
213
209
208
206207
197
195
193194
191
189
188
186
184
183
182
181
179180
168
161
160
158
155
152
153
154
143
145
144
119
137
134
121
133 192
136 135
139
142140
121
185169
165
138
132
131
124
122
125
159
190
171
172
147
167
162
146 151
128
278
283
279
281 288 290
289
282
247
246
245
244
116
115
114 123
108 109
120
142
150
178
175 177
164
107
104 110
103
56
71
65 86
80 60 93
95
59
57 81
19
70 85101
170
226
224
222 211 72
82
87
84
141
163
83
76
69
66 55 89 90
51
96
97 118
27 94
15
14
13
18 11
17
1
9 12
6
3
20
26
174
175 175
41
43
44
40 29
28
22
21
25
23
210
220
30
37 36
38
248
257
260
258
259
249
250
251 254
256
255 252
253
39
31
32
33
34
35
1
2
3
7
4
5 6
8
117
Figure 4-9. Comparison between the accounts of the project development engineer
and of the architect of conceptual input from the project case study. Comparing the
epistemological difference between the architect and the engineer as concept
developers proves particularly interesting in this case because both claim to be the
main author of the concept of this development. Also, complicating this contradiction,
both have only good things to say about each other, and both report good
collaboration between themselves. They appear to have agreed, yet, as we see,
their conceptual accounts are very different. For more details and several other
comparisons, see the paper entitled ’Same game, different rules’ (Appendix 6).
4.2.2.3 Comparing historical plots
Figure 4-10. Time series illustration. This comparison of three diagrams shows and
early iteration of the historical building code studies. Here we can see how some
suggested changes to the technical regulations effect the total picture of the
Norwegian building code. Such insights can be useful for officials (such as the
Norwegian Building Authority) when drafting new building code documents.
TEK10 Endringer
2010-2015
Forslag til
nye energiregler
anno 2015
118
Figure 4-11. Time series illustration. Together these diagrams show the entire history
of the Norwegian building code from the first national Planning and Building Act of
1924 via all the historical combinations of laws and technical regulations to the
situation in 2011. The study compares historical regulatory configurations with the
present situation, plotting historical data into the analytical diagram reflecting
contemporary topics. This produces a perspective on how building codes change
over time, as a natural, societal-scale learning process, expressed here as changes
in accent (volume) and force (legal necessity). This diagram has not been published
elsewhere, but rather than being a research finding, it represents a database of
potentially interesting topics. Two in-depth studies were conducted on the basis of
119
these diagrams: ‘What happened to the bomb room?’ (Appendix 4) and ‘What
happened in the building codes when the elevator come to Norway?’ (Appendix 2).
4.2.2.4 Timelines
120
121
Figure 4-12. This sequence of diagrams shows the procedure of moving from the
original data plots in the study of the building code history onto a sequence of
timelines. This is the visualisation of an analytic procedure in itself (an extension of
the research technique), but it also enables new observations by placing the different
regulatory descriptions in relation to each other in time. In these timelines, we can
read some tendencies specific to the regulation of elevator technology, which was
the regulatory topic in question, but can possibly also observe general tendencies
inherent in the societal phenomenon, such as learning from mistakes, reactions to
events (such as major accidents) and changes in the social constitution of the
regulating society. When analysing and comparing regulatory descriptions from
different periods, a timeline appears to be a powerful tool for revealing and
actualising the interface between a society, its history and the environment it builds
for itself. For more, see the paper entitled ‘What happened in the building codes
when the elevator came to Norway?’ (Appendix 2).
4.2.3 Level 3: generating new hypotheses
The abductive or logical steps applied on this level of reading are:
1. Making an incomplete observation (something that does not immediately add
up).
2. Completing this observation with an explanation in the form of a ‘what if...‘.
3. Inferring what the consequences would be if this indeed was true: ‘if ..., then ...’.
4. Articulating an action principle to follow that incorporates this new insight (into
desirable consequences).
5. Determine where this principle would be testable in practice and what would
validate or falsify in terms of desirable outcomes when applied.
In this section I have structured the examples under the following headlines:
1. Observation
2. What if …
3. Then …
4. Heuristics
5. Validation criteria
4.2.3.1 Society's blueprints: the limit of necessity is that it can only describe certain
law-like aspects
122
Figure 4-13. Diagrammatic representation of the Norwegian Building code.
Paper
‘Society's blueprints’ (Appendix 1)
Observation
There appears to be relatively high volumes and strong modalities in technical topics
compared with other regulatory concerns, given the broad purpose clause of the
Norwegian Planning and Building Act (2008), which also includes social and
aesthetic concerns.
What if …
The legal language appears better suited to deal with non-complex, isolated law-like
aspects of built meaning as opposed to matters of an explicitly social,
epistemological and aesthetic nature.
What can be stated through necessities (legally or even naturalistically) gets
implemented; but this also leads attention to technological matters. This in turn
potentially distorts other matters, such as social and aesthetic meaning. Hardly
everything can (or should) be expressed in terms of constraints. Certain types of
actions are conducted to create future possibilities, as shown in, for instance,
Wissner-Gross’ formal definition of intelligence (Wissner-Gross & Freer, 2013),
which proposes that intelligence is less about goal-oriented behaviours and more
about seeking to ‘maximise future freedom of action and avoid constraints in its own
future‘ (Wissner-Gross, 2013).
Then ...
A possible explanation for the prominence of technological descriptions compared
with other aspects of built meaning may be found in the language used in
regulations. Legal language and the descriptions of technology are modally
123
compatible. This is because the language of natural science underpins technological
meanings, and these are largely akin to legal expressions. More precisely, natural
science expresses itself largely in the form of laws meant to explain phenomena and,
more importantly, make predictions. This corresponds to the effect of legal language
in the case of building regulations; it predicates the future.
Technological and law-like aspects can be implemented by explicit legal
expressions. Beauty, justice or care cannot be implemented, nor should it be
attempted. Such matters are likely to become distorted or start distorting society if
they are implemented (as a necessity) on a large scale, changing the Umwelt of an
entire collective. Social matters and aesthetics become political if enforced.
Something which rarely happens to technology to the same degree.
Heuristics
1. Stop regulating beauty and social concerns in the same way as technology
through explicit legal necessity. At the same time, be mindful of what happens if
these matters are left out of formalised descriptions of built environments.
2. Rather, find other ways and create other incentives to work on justice and
beauty.
3. Alternatively, one needs to apply a rule-based (formal) aesthetic, as in the first
Norwegian building code of the 1920s, when there was a formal aesthetic
grounding regulation of beauty that actually could be tried in court (legally
determined) compare with the current situation where controversies of beauty
remain a purely municipal judgement (politically determined).
4. The final alternative is to rely on a scientific, evidence-based behavioural
approach to social concerns, if such an approach ever can be operationalised.
Validation criteria
The findings of our analysis suggested that the Norwegian building code describes
the generic building by prescribing a framework, i.e., it imposes a legal framework.
As a framework, the code cannot generate creative synthesis by itself or index all
possible solutions; its actual effect on the built environment is that of imposing
restrictions. From our findings, it seems that these restrictions mainly, and
significantly, describe building technology. However, a mapping of the direct impacts
of societal interest in the findings also revealed a broader perspective, namely that
the societal interest in the building goes beyond the technological realm.
If, for instance, an incentive-based system for implementing aesthetic concerns in
built environment can be proven to be effective, this would support the hypothesis,
as the current regulatory situation hardly produces environments of the same
aesthetic quality as did the 1920s building codes. A comparison between an
incentive-based and a constrained-based system of regulation would be the ideal
falsification or validation scenario for these action principles. Alternatively, a
historical return to a formalist building aesthetics, that may be tried in court would be
an interesting alternative in the present situation, as the result may differ
considerably in the current climate of production.
4.2.3.2 Garages: (reduction of) fear of the unknown; familiarisation as part of the
societal learning process
124
Figure 4-14. Tendencies in the development of Norwegian garage regulations.
Paper
‘What happened to the bomb room? Changes in the technical regulations of garages
in Norwegian building codes between 1928 and 2015’ (Appendix 4)
Observation
The tendency to reduce regulatory detail and severity observed in the development
of regulatory texts is confirmed in the case of garages that were studied. This
indicates a correspondence between textual modalities and consequences for the
built environment. That the pattern is confirmed also indicates that the feedback loop
informing the change of building regulations goes via the actual built garages. Users
experience the built consequences of regulation. Over time, their collective outlook
develops and informs policy (Møystad, 2017), apparently in the form of a moderated
perception of risk and danger associated with garages in society at large. This
indication of building regulations being a part of a societal-scale learning process
corresponds with findings in a similar study on the development of elevator
regulations in Norway between the 1960s and 2010 (Skatland & Lohne, 2016).
Together with the easing of building regulations for garages, there appears to be a
familiarisation with the car as a technological feature of society going on that runs
parallel with the reduction in perceived risk associated with cars and, by implication,
garages.
Finally, this development of collective perception indicates an epistemological
characteristic of building regulations noted during the interviews. Regulation policy is
as much influenced by the lack of knowledge as by actual knowledge. It is largely
125
concerned with controlling the potentially harmful effects of the unknown.
Apprehension is thus an important epistemological feature of building regulation.
What if …
Fear of the unknown appears to be a central part of the initial regulation of a new
technology. The adaptation of society’s intervention in the building of garages
appears to coincide with a process of familiarisation towards the car. A feature of this
learning process thus is the unlearning of fear (reduction of free energy) by getting to
know both the technology that is the car as well as the learning through trial and
error about the right level of intervention necessary to reflect Norwegian society’s
fear of or trust in garages. A plausible explanation for the regulatory development of
garages in Norway is thus the reduction of fear of cars in society at large, which
together with actual, gradual knowledge of the actual physical consequences of
regulation can be summed up in a large-scale learning process: that of replacing
collective fear with actual knowledge.
What if the lack of knowledge or familiarity with a consequence of a certain
technology is more influential on what elements are implemented and how than on
knowledge of the consequences of a certain solution? This implies that fear of the
uncertain or unknown is a stronger regulatory force or factor than actual knowledge.
It appears that if we know a lot about something, we can allow it to happen in many
ways. Then the regulatory framework may be looser. If we know little, or if it is
perceived as an unknown consequence, a particular solution will be preferred and
even enforced by a strict and detailed regulatory framework.
Then ...
When dealing with new technologies or features of regulation, we should not aim for
improvement (as in efficiency and optimalisation), but rather for a reduction in
unknown consequences (health, economy, reputation, etc.). This appears to be
counter-intuitive and to run counter to the AEC industry's typical pursuit of solutions.
When dealing with new building technologies, we should not reason through
improvements and optimalisation; rather, we should aim to reduce the fear of the
unknown that appears to be a driving concern in society as a collective horizon.
When working within a collective, learning is not only constrained by the ability to
learn new things, but also by the rate at which others are familiarised with the issue
at hand. Some general support for the position can be found in the state of the art of
contemporary neuroscience in Karl Friston’s free energy principle (2010, 2015)
human cognition appears to be primarily concerned with the reduction of surprises in
the future, and goal-driven behaviour such as improvements and concrete solutions
are somewhat secondary to this, limiting prediction errors between our models of the
world and the actual, felt effects of the unknown (future).
Heuristics
1. If something is uncertain, and this is a novelty to the collective (non-experts),
then focusing on one (convincing) solution is the most likely accepted strategy.
2. Or one can direct one’s energies towards familiarising the collective (project
organisation) with the possible consequences. If one succeeds with this, then
several solutions might become palatable. This principle can be regarded as a
126
way of creating freedom of choice. and increasing action potential in the future.
(Wissner-Gross, 2013).
3. The take-home principle would be: at first, do not add new things or inventions.
Rather, figure out what worries people and then make them more familiar with it
(reduce their biologically driven fear of uncertainty) before adding something
new. Then add new solutions, inventions and technologies to a project.
Validation criteria
Imagine a scenario where familiarising the project organisation with a little-known
topic would produce more future action opportunities than insisting on a specific,
little-know solution. This would be a pragmatic validation of the abduction described
in this section.
4.2.3.3 Same game, different rules: the adverbial success interval of enabling
collective intelligence and learning
127
Figure 4-15. Information reported to be linked with project success falls within a
modal interval, indicating shared adverbial features
Paper
‘Same game, different rules’ (Appendix 6)
Observation
There are four tendencies that crystallise when we cross-reference success reports
with information qualifiers and topics in this case study:
1. Virtually all the topics containing success information comprise numerous plots
from several, if not all, the actors, indicating a broad participation in developing
these conceptual topics.
2. All except the history topic correspond to modally deep topics, meaning that
they exhibit a span between necessities and potentials. This indicates that
connecting necessities and potentials proves critical for project success, at
least in this development. The project concept benefits from a tension between
information qualified by necessities and potentials.
3. In terms of modality, none of the plots occurs at the extreme ends of the scale,
i.e., neither absolute necessities nor absolute potentials. All success
information is located within an interval spanning from slightly below neutral to
0.7. This means that success in this project translates into the discovery of
interactive potentials.
4. Most of the success plots correspond to process information. This might
indicate that the development was more successful as a collaborative
process than as a successful product.
128
First, most of the success plots are connected to process. This might indicate why
sharing in this case seems more important than agreement, and that medium+
modalities corresponding to shareable (and shared) potentials are more critical to
success than the most imaginative insights. The development concept as a whole
seems to be more developed in terms of mediation and references and less so in
terms of qualities and relation information.
In this building project, the success reports are mainly project process successes,
and thus seem to have a very specific explanation. In terms of these findings, we see
that success corresponds with information and topics that increase the functional
complexity of the process aspect of the concept. The diagrams show that success
information primarily is found in the (quantitatively) richest parts of the concept. Such
information contributes where the sum of the concept is greater than its individual
parts. Success appears to be produced by sharable information concerning
potentials, creating complexity yet remaining mutually understandable among the
project actors.
What if…
In sum, success in this development hardly seems to be defined by the piecemeal
contribution of these individual actors. Rather, success is qualified in terms of the
emergent whole of the concept as a product of interaction. Success emerges in
topics where several actors contribute, creating a beneficial tension between
necessities and potentials, particularly within a modal interval leaning slightly, but not
too far, towards potentiality. This indicates that it is the shareability of information
that defines whether potentialities become a success factor in the collaborative
whole of the development. If this corresponds to systematic (interactive or social)
intelligence, what generates learning in an interactive concept development hardly
corresponds to a possibility from any relative position in this system. Rather, it
seems that creating shared potentials defines success in collaborative cognition.
A closer look at the particularity accounts also contains a clue to understanding
when and how an epistemic difference contributes to the collaborative aspect of the
development and to when it produces polemics and conflicts of opinion. Within the
same topics, an information piece that is qualified both through high value modality
and particularity seems less likely to produce responses in terms of contributions
from other actors in either higher or lower modalities. Rather, information
contributions seem to isolate differences within a topic and make topics
discontinuous between the actors’ understandings. A balance between modality and
particularity, however, seems to indicate information that produces even further
information in the form of responses and contributions from other actors. Thus,
development as an epistemological process seems to have mechanisms whereby
the quantity of information that can be produced as a basis for decisions within a
project team is limited by qualitative aspects of the learning process, or at least, the
project organisations’ internal ability to acknowledge that they may be limited by
epistemological factors rather than by political ones.
Answering this question also invites more theoretical speculation. The modal aspect
of the success in terms of information qualification especially evokes some semiotic
(Peirce, 1955) and system theoretical reflections. Given that information necessity
can be understood as a Peircean second; that is, absolute necessity corresponding
129
to a brute fact. And that pure potentiality corresponds to a pure quality, or Peircean
first, an essence in Santayana’s realm of spirit (Santayana, 2009), something that
can be thought of but that does not produce any consequence in terms of relation or
reference. Being seen as an emergence from their potential continuity, which is the
Peircean perspective (Peirce, 1955), means that the Peircean third, or symbolicity as
a cognitive modality, emerges in the ‘unity of these contradictions‘ (Nishida, 1992),
roughly in the neighbourhood of 0.5, close to where we have observed our success
interval. Symbolicity, however, as a cognitive mode is socially constituted, meaning
that a symbol relies on mediation in order to have existence. It can both exist as a
necessity – something that is necessary to maintain in order for something to be
passed symbolically between the actualisers (here the actors) – and as a potentiality,
a thought construct which, by being actualised and maintained, produces a greater
set of possibilities in a field of action than would be the case without it.
If interpreted in a social system, locally in a project, and globally in an urban society,
information modally corresponding to the emergence of symbolicity proves
necessary for the field if the field cannot be maintained over time without actualising
this information. Correspondingly, it represents the growth of a field if actualising it
creates increased complexity in either the local or the global field of action.
If our success interval corresponds to the emergence of conceptual symbolicity, that
is, information characterised by a reciprocal effect on the social field of action, it
would not be far-fetched to postulate that in its lowest values, the success interval
contains information that maintains the conceptual collaboration. In its highest
values, where it contains information that differs through the potentials represented,
the symbolic aspect of the concept is successful because it actually enhances the
concept's ability to grow. This kind of success information is information that enables
more information to become available and be implemented.
In a social or physical system characterised by the possibility of symbolic
interpretation, success factors corresponding to symbolicity seem to correspond with
growth in functional complexity, not just in the politically defined field of action, but
also in learning as a social, interactive system. Thus, success information not only
signifies a conceptual difference, but is also actually characterised by its ability to
generate growth in cognitive potential of the collaboration, allowing more things that
are beneficial and sharable to be thought, and thus corresponds to systematic (and
not individual actor) learning, which traditionally indicates intelligence in the sense of
behaviour increasing possible actions in the future (Wissner-Gross, 2013). In terms
of our epistemological information qualifiers, success factors in a conceptual
development seem to correspond not only to information making a difference in
itself, but also to its ability to increase the systematic intelligence of both the project
collaboration and the effect the development produces in the urban field or system in
which it takes part through its physical manifestation: the physical object.
In terms of epistemological criteria, success information thus seems to be wholly
dependent on emergent aspects of the development as a collaborative (learning)
effort, and on the product as it becomes part of a greater system (the city or rural
economy or ecosystem, the oikos). If epistemological development success indeed
corresponds to the local manifestation of intelligence as a function of a beneficial
tension between information qualifiers and the quantitative degree of this tension
130
being shared among the actors actualisers of the concept, this indicates that our
descriptive efforts (making this available, both in research and in practical
development) may be just as fruitful as enforcing collaboration with predetermined
success criteria. What is indicated is that we watch information qualification patterns
more closely and develop a sensitivity towards conceptual information generation,
since it is qualified by a collective, cognitive interpretant of the concept development.
As a cognitive, social phenomenon, project development success has no criteria
before it emerges out of the concept as an interpretation of shared, local processes
and greater societal, systemic concerns.
Then ...
There appears to exist an interval of modality particularity specific to a project
organisation that maintains the collective and enables the organisation to learn
together. Information manifesting these characteristics generates responses which in
turn generate learning in the project information, making more things possible for as
many as possible. What seems extraordinary is that this effect appears not to be the
effect of purposeful, goal-driven collaboration, but rather as a function of modality
particularity, i.e. of how information is qualified.
The features of knowledge, as in adverbial qualities of information and actions which
expand the collective horizon (the knowledge) by maintaining and increasing
possible actions across the project organisation, seem to be the knowledge
(adverbial quality) associated with collective learning and collective intelligence.
Information that enables collective learning, as in creating value across the
organisation while at the same time maintaining the organisation, seems to lead
most often to project success and thereby represents? the most important feature of
a knowledge interface to enable such information. This in turn correlates with a
general definition of intelligence as an action (information) that enables more
possible actions in the future (more information in the future) (Wissner-Gross, 2014).
The type of information that seems to be most valuable in a building project is the
one that maintains the collective (make it interact) and enables it to learn: This is
information that operationalise possibilities, but not too specifically. It is the kind of
information most of the immediately involved actors
Heuristics
Information should generate a response in (other actors in) a project organisation. By
being of interest to as many as possible, it should either be qualified by a social
necessity (something that is necessary to maintain the organisation, such as
collaboration) or by a potentiality that has value to more than one actor or group of
actors. Information should create opportunities or more options for multiple actors,
either through limiting downsides or creating value.
Validation criteria
To test validity, the above action principle could be applied as a screening criterion
for troublesome issues in a given project. For instance, where an issue causes
problems for one discipline but is ignored by others. In such a case, one should try to
qualify information concerning the issue in another way according to the principle.
131
If using this criterion for information qualification works, meaning that it generates
fewer conflicts or more options and leads to an expansion of the collective horizon
(collective knowledge) in the project organisation, then the underlying abduction can
be deemed valid in terms of practical utility.
Take-home points to be tested can be summarised as follows:
1. Take a piece of information representing a current problem area in the project.
2. Adjust one’s statement until it generates the greatest possible response across
the project organisation, seeing if working with things most people can
understand creates more possibilities in the future.
4.3 Extended procedure: from industry data via analytical
observations to industry applications
In principle, the gap we tried to bridge looked something like this:
Industry data – gap – industry applications
The results produced by applying the technique (and implicitly the theoretical
vocabulary) of this dissertation, take us some of the way:
Industry data – analytical observations – gap – industry applications
Expanding the analysis with the logic of discovery enables us to complete the
procedure described in the technique section, adding the steps necessary to
proceed from analytical observations (and descriptions of knowledge aspect) to
actionable principles that can be tested in industry practice. The final procedure
arrived at looks like this:
Industry data – analytical observations – pattern recognition & completing the
observations – abductions – industry applications
Or written out in terms of the components of the applied argument of this thesis:
AEC data – vocabulary + technique + logic of discovery – industry
applications
Adding the analytical steps from the logic of inquiry gives us the following analytical
procedure, or algorithm, connecting industry data via epistemological analysis to
possible applications such as change in behaviour or new knowledge management
practices and tools.
1. Choosing context/feature of the AEC industry and empirically available.
sources of this feature.
2. Collecting the raw data.
a. Document studies of Norwegian building acts and technical regulations.
b. Open-ended case study interviews.
132
3. Preparing the raw data.
a. Document studies: choosing relevant parts of the document to analyse
b. Case study: transcribing interviews.
4. Identifying units of analysis, assigning them a reference number to render
them retractable.
a. Description of the built object.
b. Information that makes a difference to either the built object or the
process
5. Selecting bottom-up analytic parameters: how the data work in context
(effects).
a. Taxonomic.
b. Qualifying (as information) adverbial aspects characteristically, enabling
information exchange in the context or enabling the contextual meaning of
the information.
6. Preparing and adapting the diagrams to reflect the chosen analytic construct.
7. Analysing the data by assigning each unit of analysis with a topic
(classifying) and degree of modality/particularity (qualifying).
8. Plotting the data manually, a process that could be automated by simple
computer programming.
9. Both steps 7 and 8 can be repeated separately or together, either adding a
degree of Bayesian confidence (increasing the reliability of the study) or
doing the analysis x number of times and doing a Monte Carlo analysis to
obtain a measure of variability of the analysis (to quantify uncertainty).
10. Further plots, selecting certain features of the data to study by means of
other visualisations.
11. Visualising and reviewing new wholes – epistemic readings of building
industry information.
12. Finding patterns in the plots standing out – salient features demanding
explanation.
13. Completing the observation (of the pattern) with a possible explanation.
14. Assuming the explanation to be true and inferring its practical
consequences.
15. Formulating actionable principles that either correct (if unwanted) or exploit
(if wanted) the effects of acting as if the explanation of the observation were
true.
16. Validating or falsifying the principle by testing it in practice. If the effects of
putting it to practice are/seem desirable, it is pragmatically verified as useful.

5. PROSPECTS
Towards a new perspective on the frontiers of knowledge formalisation in the AEC
This chapter aims first to provide a recap of the knowledge gap I have addressed in
this dissertation and, second, to summarise the research approach I have developed
to address this gap. Finally, I start outlining some new frontiers of knowledge
description or formalisation in the AEC as they became apparent during the inquiry.
The concrete recommendation for further research, method development, theoretical
generalisation and knowledge management applications are found in the
conclusions chapter following this more general discussion of the frontiers of
knowledge formalisation.
133
5.1 The knowledge gap reiterated
The contemporary AEC industry lacks epistemological description. Specifically, little
work has been conducted on establishing the industry’s unifying aspects. The
enabling interface between different professional actors has not been described
epistemologically. The universally enabling knowledge is hardly formalised at all,
even though it clearly exists. The knowledge that enables houses to be built on an
industrial scale, despite difference in intentions, inceptives, interest and stakes, is yet
to be collected and structured, with philosophical intentions. It is important to
distinguish this particular focus – this particular knowledge gap in the industry – from
the form and content of each professional agency’s (knowledge) contribution during
the building process. Rather, the gap I shed light on here, points towards a
formalisation of the epistemological glue that exists in the practical, but often tacit,
action principles that enable different agencies to work together to produce buildings,
despite their many epistemological differences.
Reflecting the reciprocal relation between the built environment and human cognition
proposed by Møystad (2017, 2021) I imagine the unifying aspect of AEC industry
knowledge to be of a unique quality and general interest or importance. This feature
of AEC behaviour is not necessarily covered by contemporary multidisciplinary
management frameworks.
Echoing the thesis statement in the preface, the knowledge gap this dissertation
addresses can be summarised in the following three observations of conceptual
deficiencies in the treatment of knowledge in the contemporary Norwegian AEC
industry:
1. The AEC industry currently lacks a unifying perspective on knowledge.
2. Little theoretical vocabulary for formalising a unifying perspective exists.
3. A methodical way of connecting analytical descriptions (of knowledge) to
industry applications is missing.
Together, these three propositions provide clues as to why this particular knowledge
gap has persisted. These observations also represent the main conceptual problems
or challenges that constitute this gap that needs to be operationalised. A common
theme here is the general lack of upstream perspective in the treatment of practical
knowledge, contributing to aggravate differences instead of shifting the perspective
towards commonalities and coherence in industry behaviour. In the following
sections we will discuss this deficiency in abstraction, as it persists in perspectives,
language (communication) and in tools and logical models.
5.1.1 The AEC industry currently lacks a unifying perspective on knowledge
Until now, AEC industry research has not produced a universal perspective on
knowledge. The epistemological interfaces that emerge between the different
professions in the AEC industry lack proper description and analysis. Enabling such
an analysis depends on a sufficiently abstract perspective to grasp the unifying
action principles across professional perspectives currently involved in AEC industry
production. Such a perspective must grasp the common denominators – the unifying
134
action principles – that enable the different professional actors’ respective
perspectives (knowledge contributions) to come together to produce buildings.
Fundamentally, the industry lacks epistemological perspective on the professional
intersections that emerge during building production. There are at least six plausible
reasons why such a perspective has not been developed:
5.1.1.1 General approach to knowledge
The industry’s approach to knowledge production leaves little motivation for
formalising existing knowledge. The AEC industry exists in constant pursuit of new
solutions to a growing set of concrete problems. Growth of knowledge is commonly
measured in available solutions to well-defined problems. Industry research primarily
concerns solutions rather than descriptions. This observation is general and thus
open to counterexamples.
5.1.1.2 The nature of the industry’s purpose
Due to the practical purpose of the industry, the motivation for producing new,
concrete applications appears greater than that for pursuing discovery, in both the
scientific and the philosophical sense. The nature of the industry is practical, not
reflective. The productive nature of the industry generates a wall between
epistemological analysis and its daily business. Self-reflection is not a priority; getting
things done is.
5.1.1.3 New responsibility structures
New responsibility structures, in Norway enforced by regulations (SAK95), has
effectively provided legal grounds for increased specialisation and fragmentation of
knowledge. Minding one’s own business has evolved from being a virtue to a legal
wedge between different professions, both on the construction site and later in court.
5.1.1.4 Absent overall perspective
Responsibility is largely fragmented in the contemporary Norwegian AEC industry,
and nobody can claim ownership to (any theoretical) unified perspective. A legitimate
epistemic perspective aiming to describe and understand the overall shape of the
knowledge exchange (characteristic of the industrial-scale production of built
environments) across the multiplicity of specialised competencies is at best in a prescientific state, if initiated at all.
5.1.1.5 Internal leadership shift
The architect as a consultant, rather than a master builder, is today’s reality.
The architect historically functioned more as a generalist, with strong claims to
epistemological primacy in the construction industry. The architect used to function
as a de facto knowledge manager. In this fragmentation and consequent withdrawal
of the generalist leadership role, responsibility becomes less a question of unifying
knowledge (and conceptual glue) and more a concern for control and
documentation. The overall perspective is now on retreat, if not absent. Leadership
135
is less about knowledge management and more about control, legal liability and
decision rights.
5.1.1.6 External perspective problems
External perspectives on knowledge are easily misdirected from the production
process as a unique epistemic locus. Outsider descriptions of knowledge often
distort the epistemic phenomenon.
As AEC knowledge is embedded in action, analytic philosophers will struggle to find
knowledge in statement forms that is immediately suitable to analysis. Furthermore,
the AEC industry does not appear to attract the attention of many philosophers in the
first place. There is this huge (comfortable) distance in abstraction levels between
productive and philosophical pursuits. And even if some philosophers were
motivated to take on the challenge, the challenge of making it empirically based
instead of normative (something the industry itself seems to generate with no
problem) would still be massive.
The user perspective is increasingly drawing attention in building politics. The user’s
phenomenological perspective, however, corresponds to their experience (imagined
or actual) with the built object, and not the process of producing it. This makes the
pure user perspective somewhat of a phenomenological distortion of what industry
knowledge is about in practice.
The traditional professional management perspective of managing people and
information, which has gained a solid grasp in building project management, also
generates distortions of knowledge, as it largely leaves out the only theoretical
converging point of knowledge – the physical object – as the purpose of the building
process. Due to increasing complexity and documentation demands, project
management in the AEC industry easily becomes process-oriented and a purpose in
itself, and therefore itself represents a potential distorting perspective on unifying
knowledge practice.
5.1.2 Little theoretical vocabulary for establishing a unifying perspective exists
Currently, the AEC industry lacks the theoretical vocabulary and, by implication, a
sturdy methodical and empirical platform to discuss the epistemological implications
of its production-driven behaviour. The vocabulary problem is a multifaceted
challenge. It concerns having the proper definitions and concepts to constrain and
capture the knowledge component of the phenomenon from empirical sources (since
knowledge typically manifests in actions (know-how) more than in statements (knowwhat, justified true beliefs). But it also concerns adding concepts or tools that can
focus on (and articulate) things which the industry itself does not concern itself with
yet are there as unconscious (cognitive or social) mechanisms. Developing
vocabulary involved being able to articulate and describe things epistemologically, to
take inventory of aspects of the AEC industry that are relevant to how we should
understand its knowledge, that perhaps even are unique to the phenomenon, or at
least characteristic of large-scale, productive and industrial processes. Finally, the
vocabulary must be at a sufficient level of abstraction to bridge the many
professional borders one encounters in the typical buildings process, at the same
136
time as this abstraction does not distort the natural spans of abstractions that are
actually going on and that characterise the industry process, such as the difference
between planning and designing and construction site execution, between financial
and legal matters and aesthetic decisions, and between processual matters and
physical consequences; the difference between what goes into the building, to be
experienced in some capacity by the end user and all the little actions that are done
to enable this but that perhaps will not or should not show in the finished buildings,
such as documentation, project meeting arguments, and negotiations over building
applications..
At a minimum, the vocabulary for describing AEC knowledge needs to be sensitive
to the following three issues and preferably contain the tools for resolving them:
I
The vocabulary that is needed is a shared one, or at least theoretically sharable.
The vocabulary needs to grasp the commonalities, not merely articulate the
differences. Several, but not all, of the involved professionals, such as architects,
engineers and economists, have their own theoretical frameworks for verifying,
understanding and grounding their own but also the other actors’ activities in the
construction project. Conflicting, polemic vocabularies will not be suited, as they
might already be undermining (power struggle) the knowledge integration process.
II
The vocabulary must enable the analysis of enabling actions, not only statements.
Furthermore, the vocabulary must not force the industry to become or appear to be
homogeneous or assume there to be only one kind of valid knowledge, hierarchy,
content or focus (as architects sometimes do). It must enable the empirical analysis
of the forms (of practices producing input and completion) that contribute to buildings
being built. An epistemic vocabulary specific to a practical phenomenon, where
knowledge is not necessarily or easily found as statements in the form of justified
true beliefs. The philosophical limits of knowledge may not apply. The industry
apparently has its own problematic limits of knowledge.
III
A theoretical vocabulary must simultaneously elevate the analysis above
antagonisms (defence mechanisms, polemics, power struggles) but must also bridge
the natural span of abstractions that characterise the typical building project. There is
knowledge in planning, bureaucratic overseeing and in executing minute details on
the construction site, and some mechanism needs to prevent conflict between these
different expressions of know-how.
5.1.3 A methodical way of connecting analytical descriptions (of knowledge) to
industry applications is missing
Insights into the nature and dynamics of the knowledge interfaces in the AEC
industry are perhaps philosophically interesting in themselves, but without a
methodical link back to applications, observation-based description and analysis of
knowledge will remain abstract and without concrete value to the industry.
137
Without logical models that connect observation to application, any new insights into
the nature of the epistemological interfaces between professions remain worthless to
the industry itself and, as a consequence, represent an outsider’s perspective. The
industry needs practical tools and models that enable the operative perspective
(know-how) of the building process and the epistemological perspective
simultaneously.
Until now, the industry has lacked a logic linking analytic description and industry
application. This might be a consequence of the lack of perspective and vocabulary.
However, it also represents a unique epistemic problem characteristic of productive
pursuits. Without the feedback loop back into the practices of the industry, any
insights into the workings of knowledge remain at best theoretical and at worst
irrelevant to the development of the industry as a knowledge phenomenon. When
dealing with a practical knowledge phenomenon such as the AEC industry, there is a
need for a logical or methodical way of connecting description to application, since
building and researching are very different processes with different aims, people and
methods that rarely exhibit spontaneous exchanges of perspective. Due to the
practical nature of the industry, the link between description and application must be
in place, a part of inquiry in order to motivate introspection, and devote energy to
filling this gap. Motivation for introspection – or value creation by philosophers with
the abstract skillset – connects description to added value for the industry and
overcomes the purely academic interest or argumentation. Due to the gap in
abstraction between epistemological description and know-how in practice, any
formalisation of the former demands a corresponding set of logical principles that
guide reapplication back into the industry.
5.2 An attempt at developing an analytical perspective on
knowledge interfaces
As a knowledge phenomenon, the AEC industry somehow resists description. This
resistance breeds conceptual, practical and logical challenges to any attempts at
epistemological analysis of industry practices. Ironically, these peculiar challenges
emerge from taking the industry seriously as a practical knowledge phenomenon.
The primary manifestations of knowledge in the AEC industry are tacit. Industry
knowledge hardly comes in the form of justified, true beliefs or statements
concerning the nature of reality, the truth or hard facts. The analytical challenge
remains inseparable from this natural state of the industry. This is hardly due to the
lack of information or empirical manifestations of knowledge; buildings are being built
intentionally and not randomly. Rather, the manifestation of knowledge is an indirect
one, and the methodical challenge consists of circumscribing and targeting these
indirect manifestations so as to reconstruct them analytically across the multiple
contexts (projects, etc.) and times they naturally manifest over the course of a
building project. This challenge is reflected in every aspect of the knowledge gap this
research addresses; in what to look for, how to describe it, and, finally, how
description is to logically become valuable when reapplied back into the original
phenomenon, back into the practical project context.
To get an angle on the tacit, practical manifestations of knowledge, this dissertation
establishes an action-philosophical perspective on the typical AEC knowledge
138
process. Although relevant, and far from univocally established, and instead of
looking at the what, who and why of AEC industry knowledge, the current
perspective begins asking where integration of multiple competencies and
professional perspectives into a common purpose is at all possible and how this is
enabled in action. Effectively, we have established the locus of integration as the
epistemological unit of analysis, the focal point for establishing a descriptive
perspective on knowledge without discounting the industry’s natural
(epistemological) heterogeneity.
Since little systematic, empirical work on the AEC industry as a knowledge
phenomenon has been conducted an entire analytical platform for articulation
operationalisation and reflexivity was needed. Conceptually, this was formalised into
a three-tiered system consisting of a logic of inquiry, an empirical technique and a
logic of discovery addressing, respectively, the conceptual, methodical and applied
or logical aspects of enabling an action-theoretical viewpoint on the typical AEC
industry knowledge process.
The logic of inquiry clarifies the overall logic of the research or analytical or
philosophical approach: how we frame the industry knowledge process conceptually
and the measures we have taken to avoid distorting the tacit knowledge
phenomenon. With the logic of inquiry, we established a tentative vocabulary and
articulated the theoretical ramification of the knowledge problem. As such, the logic
of inquiry acted as formalisation of the overall logical rules, concepts and procedures
that have guided the research process on the most abstract level, in accordance with
the pragmatic outlook on behavioural research.
The fact that few empirical observations (or data) on the AEC industry as a
knowledge phenomenon have been systemised meant that I had to develop
empirical techniques to connect the overall conceptual approach (and theoretical
vocabulary) with the actual available empirical manifestation of the phenomenon.
These methodical considerations concerning how the data were collected, analysed
and presented was developed and refined over the course of several years, in
different contexts, and finally formalised into a generalised technique, an empirical
procedure that renders the knowledge component of natural AEC industry
information salient and available to analysis.
Finally, the approach needed a feedback loop back into the industry. Analytical
descriptions were needed to generate application potentials in practice in order to
generate actual added value for the industry and not remain merely scientifically and
philosophically interesting. The systematic formalisation of the approach needed a
methodical of logical way of linking the analytical knowledge descriptions generated
from the data back into industry applications. This was solved by formalising the
results – the insights (and the process of gaining them) – into a three-step logical
procedure that shows how the new (knowledge) descriptions generate new potential
action principles (in the form of hypotheses and heuristics concerning the
characteristics of knowledge integration in practice) that can be tested in practice
and thereby validated or falsified as useful or not.
5.2.1 A logic of inquiry in response to the lack of theoretical vocabulary
139
The logic of inquiry should be seen as a formal response to the lack of or need for a
theoretical vocabulary suited to making analytical descriptions of the interfaces in the
AEC industry knowledge process. In short, the logic of inquiry is the formalisation of
the analyses, intuitions and insights that have guided my response to the lack of
epistemic description of AEC industry practices. It consists of a conceptual
framework broken down into three distinct philosophical problems, or themes,
evoked by the research gap which, when addressed, forms a tailored theoretical and
systematic vocabulary; a phenomenological frame, an epistemological analysis of
the phenomenon and a scientific strategy of approach.
5.2.1.1 Phenomenology
First, a preliminary phenomenological framing of the AEC industry process was
necessary. This corresponds to starting with the very first principles of an inquiry. We
established a lens through which we could circumscribe, observe and define the
phenomenon we were about to study. The purpose of phenomenology is descriptive.
It outlines a starting point for analysis, from how the industry appears to us in such a
way that it enables us to accentuate and observe the knowledge interfaces between
actors positively, as something that is possible to accentuate, not just as something
implicit, that is felt through its effects.
Fundamentally, I conceived the AEC industry as a multidisciplinary – not necessarily
collaborative – collective horizon of action towards the completion of an end (or
mean): that is, a physical building. This process, regarded as the sum of actions
completed by a collective, manifests positively as something that can be studied and
described in the adverbial characteristics of the information that actually enables the
end to be completed.
This highly condensed phenomenological frame has many implications; what we see
when we study the AEC industry is a set of collective, but not necessarily
collaborative, behaviours. It consists of actions shared and felt, not just the singular
actor’s private ideas and insights. Even if this in dysfunctional circumstances may
not be the case for all the actors, the industry process fundamentally has a purpose:
to produce buildings. This process can be regarded as an active inference-based
cognitive process that involves changing the world, not just acting on a predetermined script or in accordance with already existing features of reality. The input
of this changing of reality, which becomes the form and content of a new building,
exists during the project process as information. This information, if it is to make a
difference, be understood and acted upon by at least the parts of the acting
collective, it is immediately relevant to and needs to inform the (building) project in a
certain way. This way, or shape or form, of the information, once it is formalised one
way or another as opposed to existing virtually in the architect’s or plumber’s mind, is
an enabling characteristic of knowledge that can be expected to be found in the
adverbial forms of any individual piece of information. This is also how it theoretically
(phenomenologically) is available to analysis. That the adverbial form of information
is relevant to enabling knowledge integration can also be established by reduction ad
absurdum. If a piece of potential information was formalised in such a way that it
could not be recognised by the other actors who need to acknowledge this
information as something relevant in the collective process of action, it will remain
outside of the collective. Consequently, the knowledge contribution it may have
140
represented as potential input to the building process remains unintegrated and
without impact.
5.2.1.2 Epistemology
Once a phenomenological frame was established, a theoretical analysis of the
nature of knowledge within this frame was the next step in establishing an analytical
vocabulary. The epistemological analysis provided a deeper theoretical
circumscription of what we were looking for within the phenomenon, with respect not
only to identifying the data selection criteria, but also to developing an analytical
strategy that provided access to the epistemological component of data from the
typical AEC industry exchange or process.
In many ways, the epistemological analysis should be regarded a preliminary or
starting hypothesis on how knowledge can be accessed in a practical production
phenomenon such as the AEC industry, perhaps more so than it should be regarded
as a statement about knowledge in general. The purpose of the analysis was to
enable analysis. It was not a verifying effort. Its aim was to shed light on something
previously undistinguished in the myriad of information and interactions the industry
process generates on a daily basis. Rather, the framework arrived at guides and
distinguished between knowledge and knowledge-not in an effort to articulate the
differences and possible misunderstandings.
The epistemological analysis boils down to three main distinctive features that
provide entry into the knowledge exchange of the AEC:
5.2.1.2.1 Epistemic common ground
First, a theoretical common ground for knowledge needed to be established, or at
least the most likely candidate for a common focal point, given the absence of any
better choices. At an epistemological minimum, a starting hypothesis on the nature
of knowledge in a collective horizon of action towards a shared aim was to ensure
that knowledge referred to the same thing. The most common convergence point of
knowledge in the AEC industry process – unifying the architectural drawings with the
hammering and nailing on the construction site and with the roof over the user’s
head – appears to be the end product, the physical building. Fittingly, the physical
thing produced by the collective effort emerges both as the unifying locus of
knowledge and as the objective output of the AEC industry? process.
5.2.1.2.2 Insufficient interpretations of knowing
Second, by analysing the consequence of the building being the theoretical common
ground of the knowledge exchange or process, it became clear that the special
relation between thinking and physical reality that emerges in this epistemic locus
cannot be described, defined or placed satisfactorily within or on either side of the
classic dichotomy between coherence and correspondence: realism and antirealism. Knowing something about the building during production cannot be neither a
coherence nor correspondence relation. Because of the difference in ontological
status between the building as virtual during conception and production and the
building as a physical entity, knowledge about building it cannot be purely a matter of
141
a coherent logical system, since mind is abrupt and physical reality potentially
endless. The same problem emerges when assuming a correspondence or a
mirroring of reality perspective: a building contains intentionality, in the Searlian
sense, since it is made with the intent and knowledge that the world can be
something different. The act of building, with the end goal as a focus, logically
appears to be an active inference, and neither a deduction nor an empirically based
induction.
5.2.1.2.3 A positive definition of knowing something (relevant) about the future
building
Third, the relation between knowing during production and the physical building
appears best conceived pragmatically. Basically, this means that the building as
knowledge object is understood in terms of what it enables us to do in the future.
Knowledge, as it manifests in a practical production phenomenon like the AEC
industry, then concerns the operationalisation of the future object. Analytically, it thus
follows that knowledge integration between different agencies contributing to the
form and content of this object depends on contributions being integrable with the
future building. It means that knowledge that informs this future must exhibit certain
enabling characteristics beyond its content if it is to be recognised and accepted in a
functional way during the production process that never happens in a vacuum. That
knowledge in the form of information is integrable depends on the adverbial
characteristics of said information. Consequently, integrability appears to be a
defining, active epistemic characteristic of what is generated, conceived and
actualised by the collective horizon of action of a typical AEC industry project.
Specifically, this adverbial characteristic – most critical to industry knowledge –
appears to be the adverbial characteristics of actually operationalising the future
affordances the building. Tentatively, in the AEC industry an unavoidable feature of
knowledge has to do with how the actors, together and despite their differences,
enable the building to be built specifically as this building. This through some shared
feature of their behaviour (manifest in action, in how information informs the building
process in its entirety).
5.2.1.3 Theory of science
While the phenomenology and epistemology deal with establishing an analytical lens
for how to study the right aspect of the right data within the AEC industry, the final
part of the logic of inquiry articulates the scientific position, toolbox and overall
strategy of approach.
The scientific problem, so to speak, concerned how to generate formalised
descriptions of tacit knowledge in action while at the same time distinguishing
between these as different modes of logic with different scientific status, as well as
maintaining transparency about a third layer of logic – the logic of inquiry – applied to
generate the formalisation. Basically, because of the somewhat abstract nature of
the problem, we needed to generate a new hypothesis concerning the nature of
knowledge, not from pure observation alone, nor from theoretical analysis, but rather
from somewhere at the intersection between them.
5.2.1.3.1 A reconstructed logic-in-use
142
Reconstruction, a concept from pragmatic behavioural science, was chosen as a
formal research strategy. Reconstruction, in the sense applied in this work, is the
development of a methodology in the strict sense, which in turn rests on the
conceptual distinction between a logic-in-use and a reconstructed logic. The aim of
methodology is the formalisation of a non-explicit but working logic-in-use into a
formalised, explicit reconstructed logic which is its end product: expression (how a
methodology is expressed).
If the AEC industry as the enterprise of planning, designing and constructing
buildings can be imagined as a field of practical thought with its own distinct
cognitive style (Kaplan, 1998, p. 8), distinct from instance fields such as agriculture,
mining, shipping and finance, the industry’s logic-in-use would at any given point in
time be the entire set of qualifying actions and operations that characterise the
industry as a knowledge space. Seen through our phenomenological frame, a logicin-use is what characterises the recognised actions within the collective horizon of
action.
Methodology should not be confused with method or technique, as this is part of the
logic-of-use. According to Kaplan, methodology is the process of reconstructing a
present logic-in-use. It is the process of making a logic-in-use explicit as opposed to
applying and developing a characteristic cognitive style of discipline. In this research,
we adopted Kaplan’s distinction, understanding a reconstructed logic, in contrast to a
logic-in-use, as the formalisation (e.g., the analysis, structuring and explanation) of a
currently applied set of operations that characterise a specific practice or knowledge
space.
It is also important to note Kaplan’s emphasis that a reconstructed logic is not merely
a description of behaviour; it is also an idealisation of what would be in its purest
sense, in this case what the industry would be doing if it just did productive things
(acting economically), which would be the goal of creating value regardless of its
definition (negative or positive). It is also important to keep in mind that a
reconstructed logic in itself, even if an idealisation, can be preceded by a superior
logic-in-use. Logic in itself is not superior to action, and this is also an important
premise for this research, so as not to assume a polemic perspective on the industry
behaviour we analyse.
5.2.1.3.2 The primary form of inference form of reconstruction is abduction
Reconstructions (logic) cannot be found as descriptions in practice; rather, they
require analytical effort, and the formulation of possible abductions or pragmatic
hypotheses, from analysis and remodelling of practice.
Simply put, the structure of reconstruction as abductive research into behaviour or
practice consists of 1) looking for patterns that connect actions (Bateson, 2000) by
modelling similarities and differences in how actions are performed or how
information is qualitied, and then formulating a ‘what if… ‘, basically adding a
principle that would connect these actions (an expression of a prediction).
143
The important thing to note with abduction is that it is an inference from observations
of reality or, more precisely, from phenomena; it completes an appearance.
As a mode of inference, an abduction always stands within a framework of
understanding and hardly works as a stand-alone explanation. Abductions must be
tested as principles in practice; explanations find their verifications in controlled,
repeatable experiments or remain unfalsified in contexts of observation, depending
on technique and measurement.
5.2.1.3.3 Aspects of science: discovery versus verification
As a research technique, reconstruction fundamentally has to do with finding,
discovering and formulating abductive hypotheses; it is about increasing our
understanding of a phenomenon, meaning generating more possible explanations
and more relevant questions about the nature and dynamics of that phenomenon.
Reconstruction aims to discover patterns in data through synthesising a possible
underlying principle. It is the finding of principles through completing one’s
observations of data, typically through modelling or any other analytical way of
discovering patterns of similarities or differences in data that can be synthesised into
a principal formulation.
The meaning of reconstruction is therefore discovery, or generating pragmatic
abduction (the synthetic completion of data or observation); it is not a verification of
data in the most anal sense of scrutinising their reliability and validity as
representations (coherence or correspondence) of reality.
Even if the aim of this inquiry were to provide concrete answers to a set of specific
problems observed in the phenomenon, e.g., some principles of knowledge
integration in the AEC industry, the adverbial characteristics (the principles of this
research reconstructed) are that of generation, meaning that this is expansive
research.
5.2.2 A new technique addresses the empirical operationalisation of an
epistemic problem
A significant aspect of the research consisted of developing a research technique
suitable to the analytical needs of reconstructing the practical principles of the AEC
industry. Very little empirical research on the nature of the AEC industry seems to
have been conducted to date. Few, if any, empirical methods or techniques for
dealing with data collection, analysis and modelling were therefore available to us at
the outset. A new empirical approach was needed based on the new perspective
and vocabulary established in our theoretical analysis.
5.2.2.1 The practical problem of analysing practical knowledge processes
Operationalising the new epistemic vocabulary in the empirical reality of the AEC
industry came with certain challenges. Information that contains the potentially
critical and distinguishing knowledge aspect must be distinguished from information
that does not carry this characteristic. The knowledge that is (fundamentally) not
144
salient must somehow be made available for analysis. The fundamental methodical
problem of connecting a philosophical topic to data generated by practical
knowledge was how to analyse an implied, tacit aspect of information. Furthermore,
this information is not generated for the purpose of analysis, but to get things done,
given that one even knows what pieces of information that are epistemically relevant
for understanding coherence in the AEC industry; information that embodies the
sought-after characteristic. Only then, after identifying such information, can one
proceed to systematically process and exhibit the said aspect of information in a
transparent and repeatable way. Somehow industry data needed to be evaluated,
weighted, washed and tumbled if a new picture of the underlying epistemic (reality)
mechanisms were to reveal themselves to us.
5.2.2.2 The process of developing new techniques
Given how little attention the epistemological mechanism of the AEC industry has
received by the research community, a significant part of the research time and effort
was spent exploring analytical avenues in the rich, available data streams. It was the
lack of pre-existing abstract research methods that was the main problem. Most of
the research techniques applied in the industry were not made for, nor directed at,
doing analysis at the abstraction level associated with epistemological problems.
There was no ready-made solution to the methodical problem, no tried and tested
techniques that could be reapplied. The solution became a process of testing and
adapting existing empirical techniques, such as content analysis and document
analysis, in a series of empirical test runs or pilot studies (Appendices, x, x and x).
By combining the definitions and focal points provided by the action-philosophical
vocabulary with insights from case study research, the elements of a process for
selecting and collecting and storing data were developed and formalised over the
course of five years. In retrospect, I have come to regard the research process more
as an evolution – progressing almost randomly, one steppingstone at a time (Stanley
& Lehman, 2015) – than to portray it as intentional, goal-driven method development.
Regardless of how one chooses to look at it, the result – from a methodical angle –
was indeed a generalised technique, synthesised, formalised and derived from a
series of partial, iterative applications and efforts in trying to get the industry data to
speak the language epistemically.
5.2.2.3 The elements of technique
The final methodical synthesis was a generalised research technique. Essentially, a
research blueprint that selects, accentuates or analyses and redistributes typical
AEC industry data from either formal sources, such as a building code, or informal
sources, such as a project organisation, into plot diagrams that accentuate epistemic
and qualifying aspects rather than focus on the nature of the content. The technique
consists of three mutually dependent elements, or aspects.
The data selection part provides us with selection criteria (such as ‘descriptive
statements referring to the built object‘) developed in the theory section, and adapts
these to the individual research context to address the specific manifestation of the
methodical problem characterising this particular source, which differed between the
building code studies and the project organisation studies. This technical aspect also
includes data collection methods, which also were slightly different. While the
145
building code studies largely constituted a document study, supplied with insights
from content analysis (as our purpose was to make inferences about the nature of
non-manifest content or non-salient aspects), the project organisation study needed
a more thorough case study approach. Here the data collection included interviews,
transcribing and building databases of content, compared with the document studies,
where the statements largely were readily available in written form and only needed
to be identified for later analysis.
The data analysis aspect of the technique applied analytical parameters from the
action-philosophical vocabulary in order to classify and assign relative values of
epistemically relevant degrees to different data points. Specifically, the technique
highlights the adverbial aspect of informative statements (both in the building code
and tin he project organisation study), such as modal degrees and particularity. In
addition, it provides a thematic classification of the data. This taxonomical aspect of
the analysis is done to gain comparative insights between different topics of
information in the building code or differences between different actor’s perspectives
in a project organisation. In the case of project organisation analysis, the technique
also separates data into phenomenological classes of cognitive content, such as the
differences between qualities, relations and symbolic information qualities.
Finally, and quite importantly, the research technique relies on visual models
showing diagrammatic plots of the analysed data. This strategy was chosen to
provide new perspectives on building information according to differences and
similarities in adverbial qualities (and degrees) that ensure the information is
recognised and implemented in the finalised building. Essentially, the purpose of the
visualisation is to present the re-distributed data as well as the analytic construct, as
a measure to ensure reliability and replicability in the process.
The new images of building information are by nature comparative re-distributions of
the data in terms of aspects critical to their pragmatic effect in the building projects.
The data are seen relative to each other, and not to any objective ideal or standard
of epistemic value. Hence, the technique provides a tool for discovering epistemic
differences in information by means of redistributive juxta positioning relative to the
special context and information included in the specific study. The visual reading
also enables us to read almost the entire building code – a massive document – as a
new totality in just one diagram. This facilitates new analytic insights, effectively
unifying quantitative and qualitative approaches to analysis and gaining advantages
from both.
5.2.2.4 A formalised procedure: towards an algorithm
The generalised technique can be summarised as a formalised procedure, a
sequence of steps for how to make the integrative knowledge component of AEC
industry data salient and available for comparison – discussion and analysis – and
description.
The formal interpretation of this technique may in the future be expressed in the form
of an algorithm (perhaps even augmented with AI), that can be deployed to identify
the working epistemic mechanisms of any building process, given that enough
building information can be collected and systemised into available databases; a
146
naturalised, computer-aided approach to finding the pragmatic pressure points or the
compression points of a project-driven processes.
5.2.2.5 A short overview of important limitations
The main limitation that needs to be kept in mind is that this technique – the entire
methodical approach – hardly produces the truth about or even a better perspective
on the AEC industry. Rather, this particular technique produces a new representation
of a part of the AEC industry reality, of a certain aspect of the industry that interests
us: the (integrative/unifying) knowledge aspect. In short, the product of this study is a
new epistemic representation of building industry information, seen from an actionphilosophical perspective. Like any other partial representation of reality, the results
of this inquiry are limited in scope, reliability and validity.
Methodically speaking, this work is a pilot study. Even if the technique and the logic
of discovery can be conceived as a product, neither are finished products, nor are
they products that can completed by one researcher. The totality of the AEC industry
as a knowledge system must be assumed to be much more comprehensive and
complex than the two aspects covered by this dissertation. Even if this work
identifies some crucial, enabling aspects of knowledge integration, there might be
other mechanisms that override the ones we have found, and there might be parts of
the knowledge hierarchy that has barely been touched upon in the current research.
The primary reliability limitation to keep in mind when reading the results produced
with this particular technique is that the researcher’s judgement will be present in the
results. Some of the analytical operations in the generalised technique might be
automated in the future, both to improve efficiency and to potentially augment
learning from projects by AI. Regardless, the interpretive aspect of the research
process will in many ways be no different from how information is interpreted daily in
project offices and on construction sites. The technique is a tool, and tools as
affordances are seldom automatic and fool proof. Tools depend on the skill of
whoever uses them, as does the analytical aspect of this technique. In the future,
several statistical methods are available for improving confidence in the judgement
process, such Bayesian analysis and Monte Carlo simulations.
The primary validity issue associated with this kind of method is deeply rooted in the
methodical problem we aim to solve, namely that we try to make the indirect explicit.
We produce a new representation of reality that does not exist naturally within the
industry processes. Furthermore, the validity of the technique is related to the
enabling aspect of the information – or its adverbial qualities – not interpretation of
content or the information’s original meaning. This technique aims to show how
information works by virtue of some inherent quality (the adverbial quality which I
assume to be a part of the knowledge content of the information). It is not a
normative evaluation of information content, nor the intention behind the information.
My aim with this research is hardly to criticise or polemise over current and historical
practices, but rather to open new avenues of inquiry. The political implications of
doing so have and will continue to provoke questions concerning the validity of this
line of research, simply because it paints an unfamiliar picture of something which
many professionals are comfortably familiar with.
147
From the validity perspective, this research and this particular technique do not
produce conclusive evidence about the nature of knowledge. Rather, it takes a first
stab at formalising knowledge practices. This represents a research strategy which
until now has received little attention in the AEC research community. The aim has
been to reconstruct some of the AEC industry’s internal logic and at the same time
formalise the method by which we enable these insights. Either way, logic is hardly
superior to practical reality. It is merely useful or not. Reality will always overrule the
results of a study like this. Its value will fundamentally be determined by its ability to
grasp the hidden handles of practice more directly and with less distortion than the
current industry practices and research.


5.2.3 A logic of discovery as formalised feedback loop between analytical
observations and industry applications
In the context of our epistemological inquiry, an answer could hardly be just a
description of knowledge. Although the empirical studies produced concrete answers
to particular research questions I posed, these would hardly be satisfactory if we had
no way of reapplying the insights from the new epistemological descriptions back
into the practically minded industry described. Consequently, the results of this work
needed to be developed beyond the observations produced by applying the
technique and the vocabulary. Ultimately, the result became (has the form of) a
bridge between observation and application of knowledge principles, formalised as a
logical model rather than verifications of the observations made. This model can be
deployed to produce testable – verifiable or falsifiable – action principles for concrete
industry applications and future information and knowledge management tools in
practice. Basically, going through the logical process arrived at in the result section,
formalised as a logic of discovery, generates heuristics – action principles – that are
applicable, testable and potentially valuable if put into industry practice with respect
to improving knowledge integration (efficiency and innovation) in the typical industry
project process. This formal result – our logic of discovery – consists of a threelayered logical model.
5.2.3.1 Layer 1. New images of information reality
The research technique produces the first layer of our resulting logic. Plot diagrams
of industry information are? distributed in terms of their epistemically relevant
qualities; that is, information seen in terms of how it informs. These are new pictures
of AEC industry? reality. New insights or pictures of the never-before seen epistemic
realities scaffolding the AEC industry’s comprehensive information exchange. These
new wholes are the immediate consequences of the analytic procedure and, by
implication, also of the philosophical perspective and vocabulary constituting or
supporting the analysis. These images are not true or false in themselves. They
show how a particular aspect of the industry – such as the building code – looks like
from an action-philosophical perspective. They are redistributions of information in
terms of adverbial characteristics which may or may not represent the parts of the
knowledge or know-how aspect of information based on the researcher’s
commitment to the pragmatist perspective. Basically, these new images of industry
reality are analytical transformations of already existing elements. We have simply
gained access to a certain aspect of it which previously has not attracted much
attention, possibly because few, if any, have mounted an action-philosophical
148
perspective on how unifying or common know-how actually must be manifested in
information if integration is to be possible in the first place.
5.2.3.2 Layer 2. Pattern recognition: spotting the conspicuous
The information in the form of new, reconstructed images helps us spot new
(previously unavailable or unnoticed) patterns in the industry information. This
second logical layer of discovery circles in conspicuous patterns in the data plots.
Patterns that are likely, potentially relevant or critical to the underlying mechanisms,
nature or dynamics of knowledge that we are out to describe. These are patterns
that demand some explanation or effort to understand, such as contrasts, clusters or
otherwise prominent or particularly salient features of the plot diagrams. By
demanding explanation, this next layer of focus pushes the analytical observation
towards pragmatic questions and into speculative hypotheses of what could cause
such patterns in the presumably epistemically relevant aspect of the information
(made salient in the data models).
5.2.3.3 Layer 3. Completing the observations with falsifiable application principles
The final step of the logic of discovery consists of completing the incomplete
observations, that is, those patterns demanding explanations. This is accomplished
by postulating active inferences, or action hypotheses; postulations in the form of
‘what if …‘, ‘then …‘, producing practical principles representing potential
generalisations of the knowledge principles manifest in the patterns we identify in our
plots. By providing such action principles or heuristics, we complete the feedback
loop between industry data, observation, pattern recognition, explaining or
understanding and, finally, new industry practices that effect the industry data
exchange (and, implicitly, behaviour). We do this by completing the incomplete
observation with actionable principles that can a) be proved to have relevant or
desirable effects if put into practice or b) be falsified if they prove impractical,
unusable or ineffectual. In this setup, the industry stands to gain from potential
insights reached when applying this logic of discovery. It is? also the scientifically
correct context to verify and/or falsify the findings, this, being one of the cornerstones
of action-philosophical truth or scientific demarcation criteria. A formalised logic is
not superior to a tacit practical one, and the true purpose of (formal) methodology is
to gain an understanding of how things work and then ensure that these principles
be applied in practice, echoing William James’ notorious dictum: ‘the truth is
whatever works‘.
5.3 New frontiers (of knowledge descriptions) discovered
Developing and applying the analytical perspective described in the previous section
led to uncovering several deficiencies, frontiers and root problems in our current,
largely implied, understanding of AEC industry knowledge mechanisms. Basically,
attempting to formalise AEC knowledge directed my attention towards massive
deficiencies in the foundational description (hereto unaddressed) and implicitly also
in our understanding of the AEC industry as a practical knowledge phenomenon. It
appears that we can do it, that we are capable of producing buildings on an industrial
scale, but we cannot describe what is happening. Furthermore, with the increasing
complexities we are observing in the AEC industry, this discrepancy between know-
149
how and understanding is bound to create hidden risks, unexpected project failures
and tremendous lost value.
I only had time to start outlining the full nature and scope of these deficiencies, since
they are research projects in themselves. However, in the following I will outline
three particularly striking observations or topics that seem largely to be unattended.
First, the lacking inventory and overview of knowledge elements. Second,
articulating the problematic limits of knowledge, politics and other behaviour. Third,
acknowledging the complexities that emerge in the interaction between multiple
systems, levels and layers of reasoning
Thereafter, I will proceed to discuss the potential consequences of leaving them
unattended, pointing to how they manifest in existing practices and to how the lack of
formalisation and understanding limits desired innovations (my postulation is that
innovation is effectively being held back, is pointless or doomed to fail if these
foundational issues are not addressed from the epistemological perspective first, due
to the heterogeneous, complex and practical nature of the phenomenon).
As a conclusion to this chapter, I will attempt to outline the risk we are taking by not
addressing these issues, and will point towards how applying the framework of the
present research not only reveals these gaps, but also has made some headway in
actually addressing them practically in a way that generates applications as a
consequence or part of formalisation.
5.3.1 The state of AEC industry knowledge formalisation
Whether due to a methodical deficiency or to a lack of effort, the AEC industry lacks
not only a perspective on the knowledge that connects the knowledge interfaces, but
also a proper epistemological inventory. The knowledge landscape for this
fundamental industry appears not to have been properly surveyed at all.
This observation is likely a symptom of a more general ailment identified by Lang
(1987), namely that few AEC resources are put into descriptive research. Most of the
knowledge production concerns producing solutions to defined problems. Little
attention is given to the laboursome process of building a comprehensive description
of its practices, assumptions, elements and idiosyncrasies. This is particularly true of
abstract and structural issues such as epistemology, since these demand analysis
and analytical approaches that are built on sound theoretical vocabularies to yield
any insights.
In the industry today, some descriptions of best practices are attempted, along with
descriptions of failures. Any objective efforts to produce? comprehensive
descriptions of the heterogeneous knowledge landscape, however, are few and far
between. Consequently, methods and theory are lagging behind, except when
discounting each individual profession’s internal history, poetics, heuristics and
normative perspectives.
The most fundamental problem I have observed, however, is not even all that
dependent on a specific theoretical framework; it appears to depend mainly on
acknowledging heterogeneity as a foundational characteristic that is to be analysed
150
rather than explained or wished away. If such a premise were taken seriously, there
would simply be a lot of work to do, a veritable research project in itself, that could be
approached from several methodical and theoretical angles. Since heterogeneity
appears not to be universally recognised as a foundational characteristic but rather
as a nuisance to be done away with, nobody has bothered to map out all the
heterogeneous components that contribute to or define the AEC industry as a
productive knowledge process.
We currently lack a proper inventory of the elements that affect the typical
knowledge exchange. This is basically a descriptive job that could later be combined
into a comprehensive map of elements. It is very hard to build a comprehensive
epistemology, or even methodology, of practices and tactics if we have not even
uncovered, defined or tallied the elements that belong in such an undertaking. It is a
very basic deficiency, but a deficiency, nevertheless.
5.3.2 The problematic limits of knowledge
Observing and acknowledging the lack of basic epistemic inventory quickly leads to
the next insight – and frontier. If we do not possess a proper inventory of
epistemically relevant elements nor a map of its internal relations, it is also very
difficult to explore and define the limits of knowledge, the limits of what counts, or
perhaps better, of what works as knowledge in the contemporary AEC industry.
Basically, it is a matter of? being able to say something both empirically based (on
evidence) and coherent about what knowledge is not – what perhaps is there posing
as knowledge, disrupting and influencing, but that fundamentally does not contribute
to the completion of intelligent buildings, environments and economical and rational
building processes. Maybe these limits prove to be dynamic, meaning that context is
a critical aspect of knowledge as know-how, and that the hope of a priori principles is
next to meaningless in the heterogeneous exchange. Maybe our observation is a
consequence of assuming a pragmatist or action-philosophical perspective on the
nature of the industry and on knowledge in general. Maybe a more analytical
approach to epistemology is needed to settle or stabilise this deficiency. Or maybe it
is indeed a characteristic epistemic feature of the industry exchange, that it indeed
resists description because it is more fluid and pragmatic in nature than we care to
admit or are able to establish by scientific or philosophical means.
Observing that knowledge hardly comes in the form of justifiable true statements, but
often also involves sudden improvisation, negotiation and perhaps even lies and
deception, is a serious issue in any effort to formalise actual knowledge practices.
Regardless, these borderline phenomena also need to be accounted for if we hope
to produce something usable that will have a desirable effect on the actual process
in action. Overly ambitious, idealistic, naïve or superficially strict and static
representations of the epistemic complexities of a building project are just as likely to
mislead as to improve our understanding of how the enabling aspect of knowledge,
or of any know-how for that matter, works in the typical building project. Either way,
observing the epistemic resistance of the closed feedback loop (Møystad, 1998) in
the phenomenon by practically and theoretically trying to come to terms with how to
systematically study and reconstruct (formalise) actual practices rather than
deontological intentions (normative stance) demand further exploration and inquiry
151
into the limits of knowing in the increasingly heterogeneous industry that accounts for
nearly one-fifth of national value creation and unavoidably affects the life of virtually
all citizens, young and old, sick and healthy.
5.3.3 The interaction between multiple systems, levels and layers of reasoning
Finally, perhaps the most challenging epistemic feature of the contemporary AEC
industry comes down to the fact that there currently is little documentation and,
consequently, no systematic formalisation, of how different logical systems, levels,
hierarchies and scales interact with each other in the AEC industry.
Basically, and worryingly, given the heterogeneous nature and the relatively long
time spans and phases, there appears to be little or no systematic mapping of the
nature (and limits) or interactions between the different systems of reasoning that are
theoretically and practically in play in even the most basic or typical building project.
Plenty of efforts are being made to tame this phenomenon, to try to hold back the
flood gates. Ironically, however, there is no empirically based, theoretically sound
mappings or descriptions underpinning these efforts to control and establish
hierarchies between people with different backgrounds, interests and incentives.
Compared with industries such as oil and gas, there is little to no proper
standardisation in the foundations of the AEC industry. Despite ever growing legal
frameworks meant to mediate and ensure quality deliveries, without the foundational,
unifying epistemological mapping, managerial efforts to control and organise
information and people as well as the building code are just as likely to distort critical
parts of the actual meaning in the different modes and systems of reasoning (be they
naturalistic, emergent or projected) that unavoidably need to come together to make
a contemporary building. This research presents observations of these distortions
happening in some of the control mechanisms put in place to mediate between
different aspects and interests in the building process. Some of these distortions
between systems of reasoning are indeed unintended, causing both long-term
dysfunctions and short time disruptions and failures. However, it is also quite likely
that the lack of mapping of interaction between systems of reasoning is exploited for
illegal, immoral and, frankly, short-sighted ends in petty power struggles. The pursuit
for short-term profits often attempts to hide incompetence and shortcomings in the
face of the systematic and abstract demands of handling and leading such a
multifaceted knowledge process. Regardless of whether this is down to sheer
incompetence or whether the lack of mapping is being exploited for dishonest
purposes, leaving this veritable epistemic frontier unattended and unexplored once
some empirically backed evidence is brought to the table would be extremely naïve.
5.3.4 Consequences: an industry quietly undermining itself through lack of
formalisation of its enabling practices
Beyond the insult to philosophical curiosity, the potential consequences of leaving
the deficiencies we’ve just discovered unattended may prove disastrous. The
undesirable effects of not formalising the enabling knowledge while operational
complexity escalates are severe, and are not only detrimental to everyday efficiency;
they also quietly undermine some of the boldest ambitions and innovation efforts in
the industry.
152
Based on the perspective gained from conducting this research, my claim is that one
of the root problems of the contemporary Norwegian AEC industry it that it lacks
proper formalisation that allows us to transferer, scale, apply, specify, redirect,
communicate and document the proper knowledge integration at the right time in the
project, and that this unavoidably is associated with the increasing tendency of
project failure. As the industry is growing and evolving in pace with society
(digitalisation, heterogeneity, globalisation and its discontents), the lacking
documentation, articulation and understanding of central epistemological principles
at work is causing severe economical, societal and reputational losses. Developing
new solutions to well defined problems is no longer sufficient as a remedy for
emerging operational complexities, legal requirements and frameworks or user
needs, wishes and requirements. To be blunt, it appears obvious to me that the
inadequate, incomplete epistemic maps of the AEC industry – which we currently are
not even using – are in effect costing us time and money and leaving us with less
than desirable built environments.
In the following section, I aim to support this claim by presenting some thoughtprovoking cases of epistemological distortions I stumbled upon during my research
which without a doubt have concrete effects upon either the building process or the
built result or both, and which over time will also affect the society that builds in this
way due to the reciprocal relationship between human organisation and the
environment we build for ourselves, based on the theory that we are in fact building
our thinking. Building is one of the basic forms of human cognition (Møystad, 2017)
in the practical, social and aesthetic sense. Buildings represent a lasting
formalisation of our collective ability to think and act; they are the active inferences,
not of individuals, but of society.
In the following I proceed to describe three kinds of distortion that appear at the
interfaces of the contemporary Norwegian AEC industry. All of them, arguably, occur
implicitly in the wake of weak formalisation of integration principles or of poor
understanding of the epistemological mechanisms governing the input and output of
the industry.
5.3.4.1 The problem of heterogeneity: how building regulations distort certain
systems of meaning and modes of reasoning
The building code is the pre-eminent example of a regulatory system? where
different modes of meaning characteristic of the AEC industry actually collide. As I
studied the building code as normative description a building, I observed how certain
modes of meaning or reasoning, such as social and aesthetic sensibilities, are
distorted by the legal language. Technological reasoning, however, appearing side
by side with these matters in the purpose clause of the building code, appears more
suited to the legal language. Consequently, regardless of the societal significance of
several non-technological modes of reasoning, the building code and its regulations
effectively favour the legal implementation features of the built environment – both
qualitatively and quantitatively – over other concerns. The building code study
reveals that the industry – and society in general – has difficulty maintaining different
modes of meaning in the building code, resulting in distortion and over accentuation
of what can be described in legal language. The consequences of these distortions
153
may be severe, lasting and confusing. A deeper survey of both the dynamics and the
significance of different systems of reasoning (working in parallel) in the building
regulations – as well as a more comprehensive and available mapping of all these
modes of meaning – is missing, and should be the target of future research.
5.3.4.2 The limits of knowledge: how fear drives regulatory severity in inverse
relation to knowledge of actual regulatory consequences.
Fear of the unknown appears to be a driving factor in the regulation of the built
environment. Regulatory change somehow appears to be driven by a negative
epistemology. Accommodating the unknown rather than implementing the known
seems to be the norm in the regulatory evolution in Norway over the past 100 years.
The problem of defining and understanding the limits of our knowledge of both
production and the effect of built environments comes to expression in an interesting
way when surveying (and modelling) changes in the building code (and regulations)
over time. One of the main mechanisms directing how new technologies, systems
and features are implemented appears to be the interplay between fear of the
unknown (consequences) and knowledge about the consequences of how we
regulate. In both of the two regulation topics I studied in detail (garages and
elevators), it appears that regulation severity (and detail) forms an inverse
relationship with how much we actually seem to know about the consequences of
the regulatory topic in question or the potential downside of getting something wrong.
It appears that regulatory description – if detailed – says more about our fears of the
built consequences of regulation (and by implication, their societal impacts) than it
does about our actual insights into them. Over time, knowledge and regulation
appear to move in opposite directions. The more we master a certain aspect of
construction or technology, the more we rely on the professionals actually
implementing this knowledge and less on regulatory descriptions and imperatives.
Fear of the unknown appears to act as the driver of regulation rather than actual
knowledge of actual consequences.
5.3.4.3 Mix-ups in the heterogeneous knowledge process: epistemological
leadership and the difference between process and output
The study of the project organisation as a specialised knowledge exchange points to
several significant epistemological mechanisms at play that appear to be little
understood and studied, concerning both the problematic limits of knowledge and the
full significance of the collaborative nature of project development.
This study reveals that in the typical commercial development, none of the
professional actors involved appears to have a comprehensive perspective of what
actually informs the process and output. This ir regardless of whether or not the actor
sees itself in charge of the said project at a given point in time. None of the actors
seems epistemologically in control, and few, if any, distinguish between processual
matters and information that impacts the end results. It is especially illustrating that in
the case study of a shopping mall development (Appendix 6: Same game, different
rules), the project was generally regarded as a success, but most of the success
criteria that could be established had a common epistemic denominator connecting
them to process success more than to added value in the end product. Furthermore,
what was recognised as success factors by the different actors were also identified
154
as being understandable or recognisable not only to the source actor, but also to the
other project participants/actors. All in all, the project development appeared to
depend on implicit (tacit) epistemological mechanisms which enable mutual
recognition of information which in turn enables project progress and stimulates
knowledge exchanges. The actors appear to be dependent on such a silently
enabling mechanism because none of them has a complete picture of all the factors
that affect and drive the process, something that discretely biases the more complex
project as a knowledge exchange towards processual matters and less towards
features of the actual building that is experienced by the end user. The main project
actors appear to be quite blind to this underlying mechanism, even though they rely
on it.
If this case study proves to be representative, the lack of insights into these
involuntary or hidden features and the incomplete map of all the epistemologically
significant aspects of the building process appear to have a significantly negative
impact on what is possible to achieve in the typical, contemporary building project.
Without empirically based formalisation of such mechanisms and their apparent
consequences for value production in the industry, it remains unlikely that the
building industry will be able to improve its productivity or cope with the increasing
complexities generated and driven by technological and societal change. The maps
circumscribing what effects the process and the end product – as well as the
difference between these two epistemological foci – appear to be urgently (yet
quietly) needed because the industry is lacking epistemological leadership, even
though many professional agencies compete for political hegemony and decision
rights.
5.3.5 Generalising: observing the frontiers
To generalise and exemplify the impact of these observations and the conceptual
deficiencies they represent; I will now discuss how the effects manifest in the daily
knowledge management and how they effectively also block central innovation
efforts.
5.3.5.1 Project management and learning from mistakes: ‘Why do we keep repeating
our mistakes?‘
Due to its project-driven nature, the AEC industry is completely reliant on
professional project management as a mediating practice in both project planning
and execution. Getting things done, however, is not the only value managed by this
class of building professionals. The largely untapped potential of contemporary
building project management lies in the ability to make use of the massive
information load the industry produces in its operative capacity and to learn from
documented mistakes and changes by systematising said information into learning.
As projects fail around them, particularly in complex technical enterprises, company
leaders, who often work on the outside of the actual daily project execution but are
completely dependent on the bottom line of said projects to stay in business, are
beginning to ask themselves: ‘Why don’t we learn from our mistakes? Why do we
keep repeating the mistakes?‘ (anonymous quote from industry leader on the
contractor side).
155
The vast number of errors that undermine the profitability and quality of large
building projects are very likely documented in one form or another, and probably
could have been stopped earlier or even be foreseen and avoided, if project
information was processed and systematised for the purpose of (company) learning.
This could be done not only within each temporary project organisation, but also
between projects in the same organisation and even between different organisations
and institutions if a systematic, formalised system of learning was made part of
management practices.
Whether the industry practitioners themselves share this perspective on the potential
of learning from building information nor not, such a systematic effort would in
practice require a comprehensive theoretical, epistemological vocabulary as well as
an empirical framework for collecting, translating the many distortions that we also
know are happening within the present organisational and legal frameworks. There
can be no doubt that the industry sits on a largely untapped and possibly
unquantifiable valuable database which, if processed from an epistemological
perspective with the aim of generating systematic learning in temporary and
permanent organisations alike, potentially contains all the things we need in order to
gradually improve our current project performance and our understanding of how to
meet future challenges related to societal, organisational and technological change.
Seen from this highly practical angle, the urgency of a large-scale epistemological
survey can hardly be overstated. The industry cannot afford not to improve its
epistemological map. Like any knowledge-driven process, the contemporary AEC
industry needs to continuously improve its epistemological optics and its theoretical
foundation, and to put in the work (man hours) needed to conduct these high-level
surveys and mappings.
5.3.5.2 Lack of formalisation limits innovation
Lack of formalisation limits innovation potential in the AEC industry. I have come to
question the realism of a comprehensive, functional digitalisation of the industry in its
current state. Without roadmaps, the underlying logic of digital processes is bound to
distort the natural knowledge processes. Efforts to improve industry workflows by
digital means are likely to generate deep issues. Without solid insight into how
knowledge actually works, interventions are at best premature and at worst likely to
generate new, insurmountable problems.
It is not only the hope of learning why projects fail through common project
management practices that is being undermined; some of the industry’s most
ambitious innovation efforts are also being undermined by the lack of formalisation of
the basic epistemological integration mechanisms. That we currently lack the maps
means that we possess a limited understanding of the interaction between the
different logical systems on which the AEC industry relies (and is built).
The question that arises while observing the veritable gaps in our understanding of
the epistemological mechanisms at play is whether it is at all realistic to try to
digitalise a heterogeneous knowledge system, especially since this heterogeneity is
hardly universally recognised as a premise, but rather is seen as something we need
to remove (or evolve away from). At the very least, it appears unlikely that any
systematic attempt at digitalisation will succeed without critically and unpredictably
156
distorting the natural knowledge process. If we do not base digitalisation efforts in
standardisation, process management, bureaucracy and documentation on an
empirically based account of what unifies the different knowledge contributions in
practice, we are setting ourselves up for failure. Even if digitalisation were to
succeed in some low-level aspects, such as basic information storage and retrieval,
the truly valuable innovations the industry hopes to achieve, such as process
automation or learning from existing data by means of AI, remain theoretically and
practically untenable.
5.3.5.3 Wholesale digitalisation now?
Both management consultancies (McKinsey, 2020) and industry reports
(Byggenæringens landsforening, 2020) point towards comprehensive digitalisation
as the next major frontier in the AEC industry. At first glance the AEC industry
appears ripe for digitalisation. It appears to be lagging behind the digitalisation efforts
of other industries (McKinsey, 2020). The upsides imagined are considerable.
Immense flows of information demand new tools. Building projects still take years to
complete, despite modern construction methods. Long project durations make all
actors vulnerable to information loss and to challenges remembering and retrieving
the right piece of information at the right time in the process. Digital databases and
systems promise solutions to some of these problems. Furthermore, one hopes that
the digitalisation of building information will aid coordination of simultaneous efforts
and needs within an increasingly multidisciplinary project organisation.
It is not only the prospect of increased efficiency (and improvements to the bottom
line) that drives these innovation efforts. The increasing complexities of legal
frameworks, enterprise forms and ownership structures in projects demand common
platforms, both for transparency and for evidence in the numerous failed project
cases that end up in court. Public oversight and control of building projects are also
pushing towards digital solutions in application processes as well as in compliance
and surveys. In the Norwegian context, these responsibilities are divided between
public agencies and private actors acting in different roles.
5.3.5.4 Ripe for disruption?
In the current debate, there is little doubt that digitalisation is being sold. Its
evangelists promise increased efficiency and profits. From a top-down perspective,
the industry needs digitalisation order to maintain control and efficiency, and most
major actors agree on this, or at least the decision-makers. Consequently, massive
amounts of capital are expected to be directed towards every aspect of the industry,
from digital building application procedures to multidimensional building information
systems, for purposes of design, execution and compliance. And industry
representatives appear to be in favour of this new digital working environment.
In this revival meeting atmosphere it is easy to get carried away by the social
evidence and the apparent upsides. The building industry is among the least
digitalised (McKinsey, 2020), which apparently makes it comparatively ripe for
disruption, to put it in management consultancy speak. In the McKinsey report, the
poor state of digitalisation in the AEC industry compared to other major industries
might very well be a factual claim. But from a more philosophical perspective, it
157
remains thought-provoking that the most digitalised industries are, according to this
report, ICT, media, professional services and finance, while the AEC industry shares
bottom place with agriculture, and hunting, hospitality and healthcare. There is a
more fundamental common denominator here than these industries just being
laggards. I argue that while ICT, media, professional services and finance have an
important place in contemporary society, they differ fundamentally in nature from the
bottom four, which are ancient and constitutive aspects of human civilisation. These
fundamental components of society do indeed develop slower, and perhaps for a
good reason, since mistaken experiments in these sectors have far more devastating
effects on human life on earth if they get out of control. These industries deal with
very basic needs and features of society that have been with us since the very start.
I have yet to see a report of the potential negative impacts of wholesale digitalisation
of the processes underlying essential features of human life and thinking. Here, the
evangelists appear biased, and potential counterevidence is left out of the headlines.
The contemporary AEC industry is hardly just complex and backward. It deals with
fundamental aspects of human civilisation that naturally (evolutionary) resist change
because premature or misguided disruption might have insurmountable
consequences for human life. It is not directly comparable to digitalising
entertainment or financial services. It is not coincidental that the building industry is
ranked bottom along with healthcare, food production, hospitality and government.
These constitute some of the pillars of civilisation. We should proceed with some
measure of caution here, and at least not digitalise blindly, without basic
understanding of causes and effects.
My argument here is not against digitalisation. Rather, it is a call for some levelheadedness amidst the enthusiasm for digital disruption and revolution. Two
avenues should be pursued in parallel with this enthusiasm. One is the sceptical
avenue: what are the potential negative consequences of digitalising fundamental
industries? This one will probably just take us deep into some conservative political
and philosophical positions on society that are too heavy to elaborate on here. The
other is the pragmatic avenue: what would it take to succeed with wholesale
digitalisation beyond just wanting it? What would the positive effects depend upon on
the practical level of how we proceed to digitalise? And what can digitalisation be
used for? What would it take to succeed, beyond really, really wanting to and
assuming that if we just do it, it will have positive consequences?
5.3.5.5 Luddism, stupidity, backwardness and other safety measures
Beyond what may seem like superficial Luddism, we can also observe something
curious happening in the wake of current digitalisation efforts in the industry analysis.
Industry leaders want to digitalise. Massive efforts are already being put into it.
However, parts of the industry already seem to be applying the brakes. Digitalisation
in the AEC industry is already proving more challenging than in other industries. On
the surface, some of these challenges might seem overly banal, such as lack of
computer skills and a willingness to document actions/solutions as they are
implemented on the construction site. And the lack of collaboration from key players
in the building process, such as manual labourers, is aggravated by the lack of digital
standards. The typical reality of any given construction site at the moment is that
they work on multiple systems simultaneously, meaning that every single
158
documentation effort needs to be performed several times, thereby wasting precious
time and causing frustration which only escalates with the mistakes and changes
that unavoidably occur over the course of a typical building process.
Other challenges to digitalisation in the AEC industry are more complex and
convoluted in nature, such as the different needs of different actors at different
stages in the process. Different responsibilities mean that different players
accentuate different digital needs. From a responsibility, control and documentation
perspective, needs differ from those from a building site execution perspective,
which in turn differ from the knowledge management perspective and, finally from
the user perspective.
Regardless, one common denominator can be postulated: we currently lack a
common language across actors, project times, systems and abstraction levels
Combined, and without a common language, even small and trivial issues may
generate something of a black mirror effect due to? the lack of formalisation. To my
understanding, the contemporary AEC industry appears not only to be struggling to
implement digitalisation in some parts of its value chain; it is also struggling to
become smarter as a whole, that is, as a heterogenous knowledge system. We are
struggling to learn in the most basic sense.
5.3.5.6 Epistemology strikes back!
My hypothesis for why it appears too hard to digitalise the AEC industry is that
current digitalisation efforts are trying to implement a more sophisticated mode of
interaction than what we current are witnessing in the industry – and without having
established a common vocabulary, proper descriptions and a comprehensive map of
the systems and reasoning that need to come together on the imagined, new digital
platform. Industry-scale digitalisation comes with rigorous demands for formalisation
of the existing collaborative mechanism. To digitalise without understanding the
underlying principles, sounds to me like a severe and potentially dangerous case of
wishful thinking.
It seems untenable to digitalise when one has no proper overview, vocabulary,
constraints or understanding of the basic, pragmatic principles of the innate
knowledge system. Digitalisation efforts need to account for the heterogeneous
epistemological situation, because it is not just intervening in one system, one logic,
one language, but rather in a complex interplay which in itself appears to have a
particular epistemological signature that we are only beginning to observe, document
and formalise.
At the bare minimum, digitalisation demands formalisation of at least the
pragmatically enabling integration principles (the glue) holding the heterogeneous
knowledge process together. This is due to the logical nature of digitalisation: under
the hood, under the user interfaces, it relies on a formal language that will distort any
meanings (effects) that it has not accounted for/adapted to. Any form of digitalisation
relies on a pragmatically contrived artificial (underlying) language; a language
capable of distorting original meanings if they are not accounted for in the syntax,
grammar and pragmatics of that language.
159
Digitalisation of an epistemologically unformalised industry would be like applying a
higher order logic (governing logic) without knowing the basics of the logic it is
supposed to govern.
5.3.5.7 What is needed to succeed with digitalising in a sustainable way?
My immediate recommendation is that we need a basic grasp of manually learning
from projects, organisations, etc. before we can effectively implement an industrialscale digitalisation. We need both maps and inventory; foundational research into
the underlying mechanisms of the industry precedes digitalisation success. It is
highly unlikely that we will be able to do so without formalising the common
denominators enabling heterogeneous knowledge, practices, systems and
components to come together in buildings. Trying to make it more homogeneous, as
an uncritical digitalisation would, while the general tendency in society (and in the
industry) is towards complexity is simply self-deceiving and likely to make matters
worse.
5.3.5.8 The potential value of artificial learning applied to building information
Cost reductions, efficiency and smoother workflows are hardly the main benefits we
should seek from digitalisation. These factors are immediately alluring because of
their concreteness, but they appear more as incremental improvements of existing
practices, potentiated by digitalising the AEC industry rather than being revolutionary
in themselves. Moreover, the immediate rewards promised by such incremental
gains seem to make us impatient and less prone to implement digital technologies
properly.
What if we could be a bit more patient? It is my belief that the real gain from
systematic formalisation of the AEC industry lies in large-scale implementation of
artificial, automated learning. By tapping into the learning or epistemic value of
building information, not only from contemporary projects but also from historical
databases (such as public archives, legal processes and area planning), the value of
the insights into building processes as well as the critical aspects of human cognition
in general that could be generated (Møystad, 2017, 2018, 2021) are probably
unquantifiable.
Digitalisation should enable us to organise and learn from project history, between
projects in the same organisation, between organisations and between public and
private sectors. The digital aspect of this potential societal-scale learning mechanism
would be to document, process and communicate the epistemic insights into
accessible databases, live knowledge management tools and AI algorithms which
later could be implemented in anything from contract writing, building application
processes and building code development (Nilsen & Skatland, 2020). If we hope to
apply AI to improve our practices, we need to tap into a vast digital material that is
being generated daily – drawings, applications, e-mails and project databases – to
find patterns we could exploit. Instead of rushing towards the first sights of value, we
could look for deeper value in existing data. This is value that currently remains
unexplored and unexploited, and because of the enormous quantities of building
data, this trajectory demands not only the computing power, but also the epistemic
focus, of properly trained AI.
160
5.4 Summary: breaking the negative feedback loop
The real value of the analytical perspective proposed in this dissertation is long term.
As I see it, systematic formalisation and digitalisation based on firm insights into the
pragmatic principles at play are not only the steppingstones towards improved digital
workflows and collaboration interfaces; they represent the real frontier of preparing
one of the world’s largest industries for AI: efficient learning from an almost infinite
pool of information.
Much of the current efforts of digitalisation are premature. We lack a common
theoretical vocabulary for succeeding. The gold we find – such as top-down
efficiency and project calculations – might be fake gold due to the distortions they
produce when applying a higher-order artificial language. These distortions are
invisible from most vantage points – typically for high-level leadership, government
and research – but are devastating for the construction site, the project office and
later for users, even entire neighbourhoods, cities and societies, due to the very
nature of the output that is our shared built environment.
The current gold rush towards full-scale digitalisation of the AEC industry might be a
flawed one. What current research shows is that we need a proper set of epistemic
glasses with which to see the real gold. Our lack of understanding of fundamentals
hampers the learning necessary to improve practice.
From an epistemological perspective, the AEC industry seems stuck in a negative
feedback loop. The industry sees the need for change. The industry hopes that
digitalisation will contribute to change. But the very state of knowledge and the tools
we have to improve it are insufficient for healthy implementation of comprehensive
digitalisation. The industry’s current approaches to knowledge development – going
for solutions to well-defined problems – aggravate this situation. Not only do we lack
a fundamental understanding of the underlying mechanisms of project failure; the
same deficiency is undermining our best efforts to improve the situation. The critical
mass of hubris appears to have reached the point of no return; epistemology has hit
back with a vengeance.
There is some good news, however. Current work shows that it is possible to start
identifying basic deficiencies in our understanding of how the AEC industry works as
a productive, heterogeneous knowledge system. By developing the vocabulary and
method suggested in this research, we will be able to see where to start the largescale formalisation needed and will have an initial platform for doing so by starting
with a pragmatic outlook on knowledge exchange and uncovering some fruitful
problems. I have no doubt many industry researchers and practitioners, even
philosophers, can contribute to developing AEC epistemology from many conceptual
and methodical perspectives. This current work merely represents the initial
skirmish, throwing up some precision problems which only a community of
researchers can hope to tackle together.

6. CONCLUSIONS
Revisiting the thesis – with proof
161
6.1 Proof of thesis
The contemporary building industry lacks a satisfactory epistemological description,
particularly at the interfaces between different professional disciplines. We lack a
theoretical and methodical platform for describing these interfaces on empirical
grounds, making use of the industry's own data instead of relying solely on
professional or research narratives. Due to the practical nature of knowledge in the
industry, the value of any descriptive project is constrained by the logical link or
continuity between analysis/description and application inherent in any theoretical or
methodical platform processing industry data.
The aim has been to explore the plausibility and actionability of these (interrelated)
claims as starting points for thinking about some of the harder (root) problems the
contemporary AEC industry is facing in Norway in particular, but also globally.
Demonstrating the plausibility of this thesis has relied on two main factors. First, the
claim that the AEC industry lacks description had to be verified by empirical
observation, and second, the ability to observe this had to lead to something of value
to the industry practitioner in the long run. In short, confirming the thesis must come
with a way of addressing the issue at hand, a way of addressing the deeper root
problems of integrating knowledge across and between disciplines in building
projects. Or, in a pragmatic vocabulary, assuming that this thesis and its
consequences must be useful for opening the road of inquiry as opposed to blocking
it and isolating it in the theoretical realm.
Through this work, convictions concerning the state (or the epistemic understanding)
of the industry have been strengthened. There is indeed a systematic lack of
analytical descriptions of interfaces between disciplines and professional interests in
the AEC industry and, with the increasing complexities (as well as expectations and
ambitions) the industry is facing, there is a growing need for a road map capable of
handling issues at this level of abstraction and for tools that help us address these
deeper issues in practice. Moreover, the current research has produced compelling
evidence that this can indeed be done in terms of the argument (vocabulary, method
and logic) outlined in this dissertation. And finally, the labour of doing so (the findings
produced by applying the abovementioned framework) has generated insights and
methods potentially valuable to the industry itself and not just abstract discussions of
interest only to philosophers and specialist researchers.
I have organised the most interesting evidence I have found of the viability and value
of the research thesis into three categories that reflect the key elements of the thesis
itself:
1. New observations and analysis of industry data that confirm the haphazard
state of knowledge interfaces in the industry.
2. The vocabulary, techniques and logic developed in this research clearly open
some new doors to future research and inquiry previously not pursued by
industry practitioners or researchers.
3. Direct applications in the form of testable action principles and knowledge
management tools can already now be postulated, based on this research.
162
In this concluding chapter, I will summarise the proof of my thesis based on the
understanding that each of these classes in themselves, in different ways, validate
the viability and value of studying the AEC industry from an applied, epistemological
perspective, and that doing so might enable the industry to address some of its root
problems.
6.1.1 New observations of the state of knowledge in AEC
Over the course of the research process, while working with the industry data, I have
made several (empirical) observations that support the claimed lack of a systematic
understanding of knowledge in critical institutions of the Norwegian AEC industry.
The details of these observations and their contexts are found in the research
articles, but there are three observations that particularly stand out.
6.1.1.1 Empirical observation I: ‘Society's blueprints’
The Norwegian building code favours technological descriptions while it distorts the
aesthetic and social meanings of the purpose clause in the Planning and Building
Act. In the study of building code descriptions (‘Society's blueprints’), I discovered
that the legal language of the Norwegian building code seems to favour
technological descriptions of the built object in terms of volume and precision. As
made explicit in the purpose clause, the building code also aims to moderate modes
of built meaning other than the technological, such as aesthetic and social aspects of
buildings. Its legal language, however, seems to distort these matters just as much
as it enforces them. What this means is that the most formal, canonical source of
building information applicable in the Norwegian context of building actually
contributes to distorting the knowledge interfaces between disciplines in the typical
building process concerned with the differences between these modes of meaning.
The distortion does not seem to be widely known, understood or acknowledged, yet
it still has a massive impact on the buildings we produce. This means that these
unwitting distortions are not just a matter of priorities; they become built factual
consequences of the lack of understanding of the interfaces between different
knowledge contributions in the building process.
6.1.1.2 Empirical observation II: ‘What happened in the building codes when the
elevator came to Norway’ and ‘What happened to the bomb room?’
Fear of unknown consequences of new technologies as opposed to actual
knowledge of consequences appears to be a driving force that has governed the
development of building codes over time. The evolution of Norwegian building codes’
normative descriptions of buildings exhibit patterns akin to those of a societal-scale
trial-and-error learning process. In two case studies that focused on the development
of descriptions of elevators and garages, the general tendency found is that when
dealing with a new technology, regulation seems to enforce detailed control, while
the longer the technology has been in use and by implication is known and
familiarised in society, the less regulatory detail, force and attention it is given. This
pattern seems to indicate that building codes do not reflect our knowledge of a
regulatory subject but rather are concerned with limiting the downside of what we do
not know about them. There appears to be a negative epistemological principle at
163
work which might be wise and prudent if we only are to account for the isolated
aspect of the building, but the massive detail in which a new regulatory concern
arrives with in the building code also effects implementation of other regulatory
issues or concerns, especially those native to a professional discipline other than the
particular technology. Fire safety affects design, daylight demands affect window
sizes, and universal accessibility affects levels and thresholds.
Fear of unwanted consequences, which is the lack of concrete knowledge about an
aspect of building, seems to overrule concrete knowledge about visual effects and
many other spatial, architectural qualities developed over hundreds of years.
The history of the Norwegian building codes illustrates how knowledge about partial
aspects, accidents and fear often overrule and distort the totality of concerns it
governs, and thereby demonstrate? a long-standing lack of understanding of how
knowledge from different disciplines (and different concerns) effect each other and
interface in a building.
6.1.1.3 Empirical observation III: ‘Same game, different rules’
Concept development in a project organisation depends on the knowledge input of
all actors involved. In the case study of the development of a commercial shopping
centre in central Norway, our analysis of building information showed that no single
actor oversees the conceptual development or contributes with a stand-alone
concept. What was particularly interesting about this finding was that this was
contrary to what several of the project actors claimed. Several of them claimed to be
the main author of the development, and none seemed aware of the deeper
epistemological mechanisms that made their contributions affect the overall
development. A deeper study of success stories cross-referenced with the
characteristics of information that enabled such success, showed that project
information associated with overall success has similar characteristics in terms of
levels of specificity and modality (degree of perceived necessity or potentiality) that
enabled actors other than just the originator to respond to the information as
something relevant to them to some degree or another. The most important
knowledge contributions in the case study were not highly specialised features of the
discipline in question, but rather the information that resonated strongest with the
largest cross-section of the project organisation. None of the actors seemed aware
of this fact, and rather than exhibiting an epistemological awareness of the interfaces
between disciplines, they mostly accentuated the political ones.
Neither of these observations in themselves can fully prove the research claim.
However, the fact that we can observe improvement potential and outright
dysfunctions across both formal and informal sources of industry information in the
very first application of an epistemological optic on building information suggests the
utility of conducting analytic research and of the potential impact of reapplying these
insights to the industry, where most practices appear to reflect the habits of
production more than an analysis of the underlying mechanisms enabling these
habits.
6.1.2 Developing a vocabulary for further research
164
6.1.2.1 Pragmatism as a promising conceptual framework for studying
heterogeneous, applied knowledge processes
Much work remains before we can claim to have a robust foundation for describing
knowledge in the AEC industry. Applying a philosophical perspective on the AEC
industry, however, has enabled us to observe issues and mechanisms which the
industry currently appears unequipped to handle on its own. At best, the current work
should be seen as a preliminary skirmish into the epistemological landscape of the
AEC, merely opening the door to the limits of our knowledge of the internal dynamics
of the industry.
Looking ahead, the action-philosophical platform offers many interesting advantages
and should be further developed. Preferably this should happen in several directions
simultaneously by both addressing the industry's need for immediate solutions in
terms of tools and models and by expanding the theoretical description of AEC
industry elements. These pursuits are closely interwoven and should be based on
furthering the empirical methods initiated in this research so as to ensure that the
timeless epistemological project stays true to the ever-changing practical realities.
As a quick recap, it is particularly the following four conceptual tools from the
pragmatist toolbox that make it suited to describing a practical knowledge
phenomenon such as the AEC industry.
1. Meaning (or what is meaningful to talk about, describe and analyse) in the
building process is the combined effect of the actions, thoughts and objects in
play. This is a direct reflection of the pragmatic maxim or the basic pragmatist
theory of meaning.
2. The notion of the future (or existing) physical building as the common reference
point for knowledge or for the knowledge object that theoretically can be shared
simultaneously by multiple disciplines.
3. Understanding information as ‘any difference that makes a difference‘ to this
future built object, either in the form of content or by enabling the process of
making it real.
4. Understanding knowledge as the quality of how an action is performed as
opposed to an abstract entity or quality separating some thoughts from others.
In short, knowledge becomes available to analysis as the adverbial quality of
actions – in how something is done or in how a piece of information makes a
difference in the building process.
There are several avenues along which a pragmatist platform for describing
knowledge in the AEC industry can be pursued. We may apply the preliminary
toolset (vocabulary, technique and logic of discovery) as it is formalised in the
dissertation to expand on the description along the most pressing and promising
lines outlined in the discussion chapter. And we may develop the theoretical framing
and methodology further. These two lines of further inquiry complement each other.
6.1.2.2 Applying the pragmatist platform in further inquiries
The most pressing matter for developing epistemic descriptions of the AEC industry
appears to be to establish a proper epistemological inventory of the industry. The
165
AEC industry needs a mapping of aspects that affect interfaces between different
disciplines, an epistemological indexing of its heterogeneous contents, on the level
of elements, of information and of logic and systems. In this work, we have found
that the most fundamental challenge to furthering the inquiry into knowledge
interfaces in particular and into knowledge in general is not necessarily the tacit
nature of knowledge in the industry, but rather the lack of effort being put into making
proper, empirically based descriptions of knowledge mechanisms that seem to be at
work in practice as opposed to in theory.
Over the course of my research I have noted three distinctly epistemological
research projects in the AEC industry that appear urgent, given the growing
awareness of root problems causing project failure and declining productivity, which
in the light of the theoretical and methodical developments of this dissertation now
also seem realistic and doable.
The number-one priority should be to make the epistemological perspective on
building information and discipline interfaces more available to researchers and
industry practitioners. To enable this, I propose to develop a proper inventory of
epistemologically relevant issues in the AEC industry that can be connected directly
to interfaces between elements, information classes or levels and systems of the
operative logics (logic-in-use) in play. The work of connecting epistemological
problems (questions) to specific, commonly known features in the industry would be
the quickest, most concrete way of establishing and expanding a link between the
practically minded know-how of the industry and more abstract, analytical research
efforts. A proper mapping and linking of such issues would also make the
epistemological perspective more available to a larger group of researchers,
including industry leaders currently meditating the hard problem of ‘Why do not we
appear to learn from our mistakes?’ and ‘Why do we keep repeating them in every
project?‘
Perhaps the most pressing issue to put under epistemological scrutiny is how
several systems of logic – reasoning, arguing and proof – currently are interacting,
both in formal instruments of control, such as building codes and construction
contracts, and in contemporary management practices, particularly in information
management systems (of which there can be several in each building project). Not
only do we experience conflicts between different modes of reasoning in different
disciplines, such as between aesthetic matters and technological ones or between
social concerns and market economy in housing production; there are also growing
tensions between native (or natural) logics stemming from experience, tacit
agreements, traditional construction site heuristics and projected, top-down
management systems of documentation, progress planning and quality control.
Without a sufficiently abstract theoretical perspective of analysis, there is acute
danger of merely understanding these tendencies as operative challenges that will
be solved as soon as we fully digitalise, and not as real epistemological interfaces.
Fundamentally, these are meaningful distinctions between different kinds of
knowledge contributions that are difficult to spot and intervene in on the operative
level. If these distinctions remain unaccounted for, interventions in the natural
knowledge process – such as digitalisation – might end up causing massive
distortions of the naturally occurring interfaces of the diverse knowledge
contributions necessary to achieve the desirable quality of buildings.
166
Having made the case of regarding the contemporary AEC industry as a thoroughly
heterogeneous knowledge phenomenon that should be addressed from a pragmatic
perspective rather than from a normative or political perspective, I should also
highlight the need to refine our understanding of the limits of knowledge in the
industry. There are several instances where the competitive nature of the industry
blurs the lines between (capable) know-how – as in getting things done– and fraud,
lies and Machiavellian manoeuvring. The pragmatic perspective can be applied to
pinpoint and understand the full extent of these tendencies – and to explore whether
there are other alternatives, or potential win-win practices. The value of such insight
to law enforcement, contractors and the honest practitioner would be hard to
quantify.
6.1.2.3 Expanding the platform
There are several immediate and viable ways of developing the platform or method
further to directly enable further research.
6.1.2.3.1 Applying it to more industry sources
One of the most direct ways of developing the analytical framework is to expand the
context and incorporate increasingly more industry sources. As the contemporary
AEC is becoming increasingly regulated and documented, its potential data sources
for relevant analytical studies are growing. By beginning to analyse the Norwegian
building code, the current study has paved the way for future epistemic research of
all the formal sources of information in the industry. Some that seem particularly
promising are:
1. Construction contracts
2. City plans and their requirements for buildings
3. Construction tender documents
4. Architectural competitions
5. Real estate prospectuses
6. Legal proceedings (lawsuits)
The analytical toolset would naturally have to adapt to features native to these
documents, since they differ from building laws and technical regulations, but the
general procedure should fit all these data sources.
Enormous amounts of project documentation are also gathered in contractors’
databases. Any single building project contains thousands of informal but written
interactions as well as hundreds of minutes of meetings. All productive activity, as
well as mistakes and changes, is also subject to strict documentation. Most of this
material appears not to be used much less analysed from a learning perspective
after the fact or at least after lawsuits are settled and the warranty period has
expired.
Good, structured Information management hardly represents the full potential of
value extraction from such sources. By applying the vocabulary and techniques we
have begun to outline in this research, informal building information can become a
167
gold mine for proper knowledge management in the AEC industry. By analysing the
differences that made a difference, whether the project was a success or a failure,
one might discover critical insights both about the behaviour in one’s own
organisation and at the interfaces with other disciplines. By formalising the learning
process during and after a project, putting the building information to use a second
time in order to decipher the project and the project organisation's epistemic DNA
over time, new learning systems for quality control, training and strategic acquisitions
may be devised in the future. Comprehensive efforts of collecting and structuring
information into BIM models and databases are making the prospect of such
formalisation of knowledge more likely by the day and more important than ever,
because the large-scale collection of previously unstructured data may come with
new kinds of epistemic challenges; as we have seen in our empirical studies of
building codes, collections of epistemologically heterogeneous information might just
as easily distort the interfaces between different disciplines, stakes and incentives as
improve them.
6.1.2.3.2 Conducting comparative studies between different contexts
Comparative studies between not just different contexts of the building industry but
also different national frameworks, represent another promising application of the
analytical framework presented in this dissertation. Comparative building law and
international collaboration in building regulation are well established research fields,
and might be furthered – or at least challenged – by epistemological comparison
between different regulatory situations. Such analysis might also be helpful for
developing international standards for building regulations as well as for improving
knowledge dissemination across national borders. For instance, these types of
analysis can be performed by comparing contemporary regulatory situations with
building output in comparable climate zones, or one might even proceed to compare
building code history between borders to discover how the introduction of new
technologies and practices might have similar and different consequences in
different contexts.
In international management consulting reports (McKinsey, 2020) the building
industry is increasingly depicted as a laggard in innovation, standardisation and
digitalisation compared with other industries such as oil and gas. Some of this might
be true and some of it might be imprecise, since it reflects the epistemological
differences between such industries and not just differences in operational
excellence. By applying the pragmatic framework for knowledge analysis, we might
be able to distinguish such differences and, even more, we might be able to pinpoint
where the AEC industry could learn from other industries, and where it needs to
develop its own ways given its particular nature. The abstraction level of the
theoretical vocabulary developed in this research, as well as the generalisation
efforts put into the method development, make the work potentially valuable outside
the AEC for comparative studies and, with certain phenomenological modifications,
as an analytical framework suited to many human, productive project-driven pursuits.
6.1.2.3.3 Expanding the toolbox of analytical parameters
One important feature of the analytical technique we have outlined in this
dissertation is the flexibility of the analytical parameters that can be incorporated into
168
the analytical construct. The parameters developed in this study were all developed
bottom-up from the context of the data capture. The parameters should reflect the
context and the data sources to which they are applied, and only the limitations in
the chosen visualisation technique constrain the number of dimensions that can be
incorporated into an epistemological analysis. In the empirical studies I had time to
conduct during my work on the dissertation, I developed only six dimensions: source,
topic, mental taxonomy, modality, particularity and historical time. The building code
studies operated with only two main parameters – topics and modality – and time
was subsequently incorporated as a third analytical dimension in the historical
studies on Norwegian building laws and regulations.
In the project case study, I modified modality to reflect mental as opposed to legal
necessity, and imagined necessity in continuity with virtual possibility. Furthermore, I
added a mental taxonomy, in addition to the pragmatic topics introduced in the
building code studies, drawing on a pragmatic cognitive phenomenology which
connected strongly with the theoretical foundations of the epistemological
perspective (Peirce, 1955). Finally, I added particularity – or epistemological
precision or? level of clarity with respect to reasoning behind a piece of information –
as an analytical dimension. This final step also enabled us to make the critical
distinction between process information and information that actually shaped the
physical building produced in the project.
A number of alternative parameters where also discovered and evaluated over the
course of the research process. The following is a list of particularly promising
analytical dimensions with epistemological relevance which I hope to incorporate in
future studies:
Project time
Instead of historical time of societal changes in building code, we can analyse project
information based on the timelines in the project, assigning them time stamps that
provide us with a decision and information timeline.
Decisions
Once we have project time stamps, we might start analysing the order of decisions
and their epistemological basis at a given time, also distinguishing between known
and decided, internal and external, virtual (possible) and inscribed (processed)
information.
Links
Inspired by Paul Thagaard’s (2000) naturalist coherence epistemology, we might
operationalise and even visualise the interconnectedness of information in a building
process. Showing both qualitatively and quantitatively the difference between
information connected to a lot of other information in the project, and isolated matters
that still make a difference. Such an analysis would be helpful to discover critical
points and junctures in a project process, as well as mapping the problematic and
successful interfaces from which such information emerges.
Experience
Once the building is completed and is in use, we might start connecting users’
experiences (reports) with the information and knowledge that shaped the building.
169
Such a toolset might be very handy for learning between buildings (past projects)
and (new) projects, incorporating a fact-based user perspective, and for learning
between building sites, times and urban contexts.
6.1.2.3.4 Validating, triangulating and testing hypotheses
Figure 6-1. As the theoretical and methodical challenges of the topic, combined with
the state of research in the industry, meant that most of the research was
concentrated in the first two to three phases of discovery, validating the results
produced remains a natural next step in developing the platform and furthering
empirical studies into the epistemological constitution of the contemporary AEC
industry.
There are several possible approaches to validation of both the framework and the
findings. One viable approach relates to alternative platforms and existing research.
In the future, time should be spent on triangulating the insights reached, applying the
pragmatist platform to research findings and literature currently recognised by the
AEC research community, primarily nationally (given the Norwegian context) but also
abroad. In some cases we will find very little research has been done on the subject,
while in other cases the findings will resonate with existing hypotheses. To some
extent the work is sure to attract some controversy, since it approaches something
concrete and well known – the industry data, with their very familiar operational
meaning – from a more abstract standpoint, in some cases turning the familiar into
something unknown and therefore potentially unrecognisable, even to veteran
researchers and practitioners.
170
Another validation strategy would be to compare the findings with the predictions of
known, relevant empirical laws of behaviours such as Zipf’s law (Zipf, 1932;
Mandelbrot, 1968), Wissner-Gross’ formal definition of intelligence (2013) and Pareto
distribution (Reed, 2001). By incorporating such formalisation efforts into the
validation criteria of the research, we can also gain some predictive capabilities
alongside our analytical description. Relating the research to formalisation of
empirical phenomena may also help us generalise the platform and particularly the
technique applied to other contexts of research, such as other instances of human
productive behaviour in need of description and analysis.
Finally, the most important mode of validation remains: Testing the action
hypotheses in their proper context, that is, in AEC industry operations. The research
has produced some falsifiable, actionable postulations which may, should they
generate desirable outcomes if put into practice, may become an active part of
industry know-how. Both actual heuristics, as described in the logic of discovery
chapter, and derivatives of the methods developed in the form of knowledge
management tools, should be tested and developed in collaboration with industry
practitioners. Logic is never superior to real life, and the most rigorous demand of
pragmatically conceived knowledge is that it should work and have an effect.
6.1.2.3.5 Comparing the platform with other viable approaches
The main premise and motivation for developing an action-philosophical framework
for analysing knowledge in the AEC industry was the apparent lack of any existing
conceptual platform for doing so on empirical grounds.
Over the course of the research process, I partly encountered and partly was made
aware of other conceptual approaches that might be suited to analysing AEC
industry data. Some of these represent abstract philosophical perspectives while
others are more technical, methodical approaches, mostly from the social sciences.
Developing an epistemic perspective without having a comprehensive road map of
existing literature took considerable energy and effort. None of the approaches listed
below fully corresponds to the theoretical and practical constraints I worked within
(see the chapter on vocabulary). In some cases the abstraction levels remained too
low for the epistemic outlook I was after, while in others the scope of my research fell
outside of the set of problems recognised by the underlying research community.
Some of these approaches, if not all of them, might yield results comparable to mine
in the empirical studies; at least it would be interesting to triangulate readings of
building information conducted with such frameworks. In the future, I hope to relate
my research to findings and methods in the following research approaches:
1. Studies of power relations (sociology and political science)
2. Philosophical hermeneutics (philology, language and semiotics)
3. Transcendental pragmatism (compared to classical pragmatism)
4. Tacit knowledge studies (management and organisational research)
5. Discourse analysis (sociolinguistics)
6. Actor-network-theory, both mediation and controversy theory
7. Transactional cost theory (business and management)
171
8. Principal agent theory (political science)
6.1.2.3.6 Automating the analytic procedure and developing algorithms and artificial
learning
A future potential, and one of the main motivations of generalising the analytical
procedure I developed and used in the empirical studies, is to develop the procedure
into an algorithm. This should in theory enable the automation of the procedure and,
implicitly, the epistemological analysis of building information which otherwise would
take the individual researcher years to accomplish.
Efforts in automating the analytical procedure, connecting it more directly to data
bases and documents will potentially become very valuable. Given the sheer volume
of potentially relevant in the industry, including both backlogs and future project, the
industry needs tools that are capable of handling large datasets. Over the course of
my research, I experimented with content analysis software to simplify and combine
data collection and analysis. At the time, much of the software was in its infancy, and
with the emergence of big data and social media mining, the availability of powerful
content analysis software and database technology has exploded.
By developing the technique and logic into an algorithm, one also opens the door to
training an AI that can recognise patterns and connections that human readers
would not think of. High expectations are held for what AI can contribute to the AEC
industry. In my opinion, it is particularly the combination of data richness and
heterogeneity (marked by challenging interfaces between disciplines) that makes the
use of AI in AEC industry knowledge management interesting. It is perhaps not so
much the ability to predict the future by means of artificial learning that holds the
greatest potential in the industry; rather, it is the potential of learning from the past, of
utilising historical building information to understand and learn from past successes
and failures in a way we cannot even imagine at present. My intuition is that in order
to do so, we need an upstream starting point to bridge the many differences between
disciplines that currently challenge and complicate the higher-order learning
processes that building processes represent. The pragmatic perspective on
knowledge might prove useful in digitalising these efforts, since pragmatism also
underpins much of modern computer science, artificial languages and information
theory.
6.1.3 Enabling new tools: analyses and applications linked
Presented below are three schematic sketches of knowledge management tools that
seem plausible on the basis of the theoretical vocabulary and empirical techniques
developed over the course of this research process. The common denominator is the
epistemic focus on enabling mechanisms in the AEC industry, as well as the
abstraction level it introduces to learning and managing knowledge interfaces and
disciplines in the typical building project.
6.1.3.1 Knowledge management tools
6.1.3.1.1 Project knowledge forensics
172
One of the main untapped potentials for better knowledge management in the AEC
industry is development of a sufficiently abstract platform for learning from (the many
input sources of) projects. Few contemporary building projects go through an
epistemic debrief, meaning that even if the project is the main working method and
the vessel of knowledge exchange and learning in a project-driven organisation, very
little analysis of what went right and what went wrong seems to happen after the fact,
that is, after the project is handed over. One simply hurries along to the next project,
devoting no time or money to analysis. Enormous databases, both analogue and
digital, potentially containing invaluable insights that could make the difference
between failure and success in future projects are seldom revisited for matters other
than complaints, warranties, and lawsuits. Despite having better documentation
available than ever before in history, there appears to be little to no will to analyse
behaviour in a systematic way on the organisational level in order to learn from
mistakes and successes and to improve.
There is vast potential for knowledge analysis on the project level in the AEC
industry. This kind of analysis, similar to the one I conducted in my case study, can
produce concrete insights on what one should learn from a project, where one might
improve in the future, and how one was able to collaborate and interact with other
disciplines. It is particularly the interfaces between disciplines that should be
reviewed and learned from after a project is completed, because that is where most
money and time are lost in large and complex projects.
One can imagine many ways of applying insights of success and failure if one is able
to find them on the epistemological level. They can be used for internal training and
experience and knowledge transfer between personnel during a project (especially
when key people leave a project before completion). Documented success factors
and weaknesses can be used for strategic hiring and can help a business formulate
tenders and decide on which tenders to respond to and who to partner up with for
collaboration.
Project knowledge is not just relevant to the individual project, it also represents
iterative changes in the organisation's epistemological DNA. Knowing the
organisation's epistemological DNA, based on project performance and how it
evolves over time as a reflection of project and personnel history, should not just be
a conceptual idea; it should be common practice, because I can think of no
company, not contractors, consultants or developers, that would not benefit from
having data-driven documentation of what they are good at (where they make
money) and what should be improved in order to grow their business and avoid
losses.
Project knowledge forensics, as I tentatively have called this mode of project
analysis, can be imagined to happen after the fact, but we should also look into ways
of implementing it into the project as a way of managing information, interfaces and
knowledge contribution live, when they make a difference. In addition to having
information databases, many projects would also benefit from having a map of the
knowledge in play, not only as data and people (with certain competencies) but also
seeing how these play out, day by day, in the interfaces with other actors, interests
and disciplines, where they actually make a practical difference to failure or success.
Any project can and should be thought of as a pattern of knowledge and learning
173
between a multidisciplinary organisation. If we were to establish and see this pattern,
based on verifiable empirical observations, I am convinced that industry would
become better equipped to learn from its mistakes.
Purpose:
To utilise project information to generate epistemological maps of projects that can
be compared with and related to other projects in the same or similar organisations.
This makes it possible to learn from both success and failure, both from and between
projects. Building information should be used a second time in order to uncover
tendencies in the company’s knowledge practices. Over time one develops a datadriven outlook of what one does well and where one needs to improve. By modelling
the organisation's epistemological DNA as it repeats and changes over time from
project to project, one gains both tactical (during a project) and strategic advantages
over competitors (and collaborators) who choose not to, or are unable to, learn from
their own processes.
Topics:
Knowledge management, information management, epistemological analysis,
success factors, project learning, organisational development, strategic management
Actors:
Contractors, consultants, architects, developers, public authorities, banks and
insurance agents
Sources:
Project data bases, project correspondence, meeting minutes
Time/occasion:
During projects and after projects
Key value:
Quality control, personnel training, human resource management, tender analysis
6.1.3.1.2 Free energy in the contracts
Visualising the knowledge interfaces in complex contracts (enterprises) to predict
where challenges between disciplines may or will arise
When: After contracting, before construction start
Purpose:
To identify potential problems in the interfaces between different disciplines already
in the contracts: to predict and avoid conflicts, the need for extra resources and
focus; or to renegotiate and redesign contractual interfaces before they become
construction site interfaces.
Topic: Knowledge management, contract and enterprise law, project management
Actors: Contractors, advisers, architects, developers
Sources: Construction contracts
174
Time/occasion: Before, during and after projects
Value: Predicting project challenges, quality control, avoiding lawsuits
6.1.3.1.3 Free information in the project
Project organisation maps are commonly used in the acquisition phase when
answering tenders and writing up project offers to showcase that key project
positions will be covered by competent personnel. Often this is also the only time the
project organisation map is used and updated, regardless of how many changes the
actual project organisation goes thought during a multiple-year project. What if the
project organisation map were to be updated weekly and used as a visual tool,
managing information and people as a means of ensuring that all current information
in the project has a responsible manager and making sure the baton is properly
handed over when a project leader unavoidably will be replaced? By visually
updating a project organisation chart weekly, making sure to connect information
topics, and perhaps even tasks and problems, to people, one would with minimal
effort generate an information timeline that could become immensely rich in content
over the course of a typical four-year project (including both planning and execution,
this would add up to a 208-piece timeline). Such a simple visualisation of information
and people in a project could have a preventive effect by avoiding the ball to be
dropped when critical personnel leave the project, and could serve as a tool for
revisiting a project after the fact when something has gone wrong in order to identify
the error, quantify the cost remedying it, and to learn from mistakes with greater
precision. We should not be fooled by the apparent simplicity of such a visual tool. It
can be surprisingly difficult to figure out who is in charge of just overseeing a
particular topic in the complexity of contemporary projects, even more so after the
fact. And if we could avoid free or floating information – information without a
responsible owner – in a project just by updating a flow chart weekly, the cost/benefit
of such an tool should quickly turn it into a universal practice, provided one manages
a maintain a sufficiently high abstraction perspective on information classes in the
project. The benefits are also likely to show during legal after-matches of a failed
project. Being able to quantify the cost of dropping the ball on the construction site is
likely to motivate project management and craftsmen as well as build convincing
court cases of complex causal relationships after the fact.
Purpose:
To visualise the project organisation in relation to active information topics on a
weekly basis. This will enable the organisation to anticipate when the ball is dropped
on a particular subject and who was involved and to quantify the cost of such
incidents.
Topics:
Information management, human resources, project learning, organisational
development, strategic management, legal proceedings
Actors:
Core project management team: project leaders and engineers from all contractors
and disciplines
Sources:
175
Contracts, weekly project meetings, building documentation, crew plans
Time/occasion:
During project development and execution, and in legal processes
Value:
Quality control, human resource management, process documentation, risk
management
Figure 6-2. A possible way of imagining project timelines based the free energy
principle. The purpose of the visualisation is to keep an eye on information in play
during the project and minimise information loss and uncertainty about (project)
future.
6.2 Synthesis: A model of the production of built
environment as cognition
The following is an attempt at a synthesis of the theoretical implications of the
current work when seen in relation to Møystad’s theory of cognitive reciprocity
between the brain and built environments (1993, 2017, 2021), also relating it
structurally to some leading formalisation of human cognition, intelligence and
learning. They outline an ecological model of the epistemology of cognition
(interaction) and the built environment.
176
Figure 6-3. In building the new hypothesis concerning the relation between human
cognition and the built environment (particularly as manifested in the industrial
behaviour of building new environments), we start out by comparing the structural
similarity between the logical components that have governed this research and
Møystad’s generalisation of the architectural cognitive sign. Both models are based
on Peircean triadic logic, even if Møystad’s is primarily an illustration of a semiotic
relationship between physics, action and thought and mine starts from a Peircean
phenomenological (phaneroscopic) perspective aimed at analysing the
cognitive/epistemic content of productive behaviour. While Møystad’s model largely
is a formalised logic in itself, my purpose is complimentary, as it aims to analyse
behaviour to produce formalisation of the involved logic, which we can expect to be
in accordance with (or contradict) Møystad’s higher-order abstraction.
Figure 6-4. A fundamental difference between Møystad’s semiotic model and the
ecology of logics applied is the purpose. While Møystad’s is an abstract
generalisation of what is involved in the architectural cognition, meaning an abstract
description, the relation between logics in this dissertation is a toolbox designed to
enable the empirical analysis of behaviours (action and thinking in practice) of the
industrial (scale) production of the built environment. This means that the purpose
here is to analytically generate hypotheses or explanations from data. Møystad’s
model should primarily be read in the behavioural direction of active inference, which
is the opposite direction of the analytical purpose of the current model. Structurally
177
and epistemologically, however, the models correspond in content, and appear to be
complementary in nature. Interestingly, combining them provides some new
suggestions about the nature of the relationship between analysis and synthesis, a
philosophical problem that has been hotly debated since Kant (Quine,1951, 1978).
Figure 6-5. The following step involves some speculation. Here we take a leap for
the purpose of hypothesis formulation by placing the three theoretical formalisations
of cognition on which I have drawn in this dissertation in the context of Møystad’s
generalised model. The arguments for placing the respective theories accordingly
will be elaborated upon in future work and should be regarded here as an
imaginative leap, an early’ what if …’.
178
Figure 6-6. The next step involves expanding upon Møystad’s semiotic descriptions
of the characteristics of elements of the cognitive sign with a more general (and
perhaps commonplace/everyday language) interpretation. In general, the current
research should be read as an elaboration of Møystad’s cognitive model, adding
some behavioural interpretation of the elements of the architectural cognition. In
Møystad (1993, 2017) some of these readings are anticipated in the exposition of the
Archème. A behavioural dimension is added to Møystad’s semiotic model.
179
Figure 6-7. By adding the primary inference forms and their internal relation in terms
of an analytical reading direction to the perspective, we effectively expand Møystad’s
(1993, 2017, 2021 (forthcoming)) generalisation of the architectural sign with an
analytical dimension, practically enabling empirically based reconstruction of
cognitive behaviours in the AEC industry. This layer should be read in light of the
analytical descriptive framework developed in this dissertation. Here the analytical
perspective to the architectural sign is seen from a behavioural pragmatic
perspective since it pertains to (productive) behaviour, such as in the AEC industry.
180
Figure 6-8. Adding the behavioural reading direction, the active inference (Friston,
2010) also gives grounds for hypothesising about which primary brain networks
(Uddin et al., 2019) are involved in the cognitive behaviour associated with each
element, phase and sequence of the behaviour in practice.
181
Figure 6-9. Adding the relative role of three major brain networks also strengthens
the relevance of seeing this ecological sketch in relation to the three formalisations of
cognition I introduced earlier, completing the cognitive epistemology with an active
direction and an analytic direction, as well as with relevance to known modes of
behaviour and signification and how they might relate to important formalisation of
cognition, artificial learning, theories of mind and action and, possibly, the neural
substrata constituting said cognitive behaviour.
6.2.1 An epistemological algorithm of the production of built environments
Finally, what this generalised model suggests has deep consequences for our
understanding of human behaviour and thinking if read in the light of Møystad’s
theory of reciprocity between the brain and built environment as a foundational (as
distinct from just a specialised) aspect of human cognition. If taken seriously as a
new hypothesis concerning the nature of thinking, the generalised process of human
cognition, as it is represented in AEC industry activity involves the following
sequence or steps:
182
1.By pursuing one’s interest according to individual memory structure, searching
for compression progress (Schmidhuber, 2010), one discovers some (positive)
surprising insight that change one’s relation to the environment.
2.This insight must then be inscribed (by communicating it) into the collective
horizon (the project organisation and society in general). Here, the insight is
made socially recognisable and relevant by showing how it obviously (as
distinct from potentially) increases action possibilities for the collective in the
future (Wissner-Gross, 2013).
3. Then, the collective proceeds to decide that the insight should be a permanent
feature of the shared environment. Embodying the insight as a new built feature
of society would contribute to reducing uncertainty in the future or to ‘reduce
free energy‘ (Friston, 2010) in society. By constructing a new building through
labour, society embodies the insight as a new part of the self-evidence of the
collective.
4. Finally, with this new feature embodied as a part of the shared Umwelt, the
memory structure of both the collective and the individual is changed by a new
node or compression (Schmidhuber, 2010), and the active cognition process
may start again with new features and insights to be found, due to the changes
in the environment just achieved by the new building.
6.3 Discovering the limits of knowledge: a personal
conclusion
The contemporary building industry lacks a satisfactory epistemological description,
particularly at the interfaces between different professional disciplines.
Personally, the most compelling evidence I found for this claim was actually realising
the limits of my inquiry as I struggled along with it. In the current state, we do not
even possess an elementary inventory of the epistemologically relevant content of
the AEC industry. The industry has not even been indexed from a epistemological
perspective, much less analysed. At several junctures in my research process I had
to stop just to take stock of how many things I did not have time to incorporate and
look into. With every research question I answered, 10 new ones arose. I have come
to realise that much of the reason why this inquiry has produced more questions
than answers is that the AEC industry lacks a basic inventory of epistemic content;
there is no systematic, canonical mapping of what a comprehensive epistemological
description actually should or must include, but it certainly does not lack the raw
material.
In my view, the key accomplishment of this work lies in how it (starts to) illuminates
or outlines the limits of epistemological descriptions of discipline interfaces in the
AEC industry. Even if there are bits and pieces of analytic descriptive work on the
AEC industry out there, I could find no evidence (in any of the places I looked) of any
comprehensive efforts to systemise the AEC industry's many elements into a
(preliminary) epistemological inventory, and even less so a logical system or
complete theory. Just think about it: we currently do not even have a satisfactory
inventory, not even a conceptual shopping list, of what should be included in an
applied epistemology of the AEC industry.
183
By acknowledging how very few stones I managed to turn, I found solid evidence for
the haphazard state of analytic descriptions and insights into knowledge interfaces.
Moreover, it is not my impression that such an effort would be impossible, in fact I'm
rather convinced that it is quite doable given the ample and available information out
there, but there are no shortcuts. One needs to proceed according to some kind of
grid (a given position, vocabulary and methodological conviction if one is to gain,
first, an index and then, hopefully, a usable map of knowledge in the AEC industry.
By taking the thesis seriously, as a viable optic for analysing the current state of the
AEC industry, I hope to have introduced a new viable perspective that enables us to
see expansive, unploughed fields that will keep curious researchers occupied for
years should anyone care to venture after me. By doing so, by acknowledging and
observing the vast raw material and asking the question of how to possibly make
sense out of this, I have also gained at least a provisional road map for how to start
remedying the situation. 